So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now always if we want more pressure we can cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day.
We're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running and vice versa on that other side.
I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I want to stay on the ball of the foot and I'm just going to go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral.
over with the left over with the left hand and then i'm just gonna speed that up i'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're gonna go for 30 seconds
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go over with the left leg.
I'm gonna come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't wanna go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom.
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're gonna go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So with my shoulder elevated bridge march, my shoulders are gonna be on a bench, hips up.
From here, I'm really focusing on glutes and hamstrings.
I'm gonna drive, get that 90 degree angle at the knee, same while keeping those hips up, and bring it down controlled, making sure those hips stay nice and stable, driving up opposite leg, and down nice and controlled.
This exercise is one of my favorite for getting people into lateral plyometrics, which takes your ankle, your feet, spring and health to a whole nother level.
Now I need you to do this pain free and that's why we're starting at such a low point.
Now a lot of you guys can skip this.
If you do level one pain free, keep moving on until you find the level that actually challenges you.
There is seven levels here.
Okay, but I want you all to start at level one, feel it out and then gradually work up.
so for your first level we need to deload our body weight so we use assistance so i can get two stable chairs and i can just push down into those chairs and that deloads my body weight i could also hook some bands around a power rack and hold on to those bands right below my chin because that deloads my body weight you could hold on to some poles or hold on to a power rack hold on to a friend's shoulders so find some way to have it assisted and deload your body weight personally i like to use chairs whenever possible
i'm going to set up in a split stance okay most of my pressure is on this front foot but i do want to keep this back foot down because that provides a second form of assistance all right as we progress later on we will pick it up and go to a true single leg hop but for your first couple levels i do want that back foot down all right so i'm in this split stance and this thigh is shooting straight down and i'm on the ball of the foot here
I'm gonna come to the balls of the feet on the front foot so that heel is lifted just off the ground, and I'm gonna use a marker, and I'm gonna mark out six inches, okay?
So just mark out a couple lines, it could be pieces of tape, whatever you want, at six inches.
So I know that I need the outside of my foot, outside of this one, and the inside of my foot, my big toe, outside of this one when I'm going side to side, all right?
So I'm set up in my split stance.
For the first variation, it is a double hop.
We're not ready to redirect all that energy yet, so I want you to get there and do a little double hop and then push to the next side.
So it's one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two.
If you're starting at baseline and you haven't done plyometrics in a really long time, you might wanna push pretty hard into the chairs or have a lot of band tension to really deload your body weight.
and I'm just doing this little side to side.
I'm not even fully extending my knee.
I'm keeping that knee with that slight bend and I'm just doing a double hop and hopping over to that other side.
If you can do that pain free, let's move on to level two.
Level two is the same exact setup, but now I take away the double hop and now I'm just springing side to side.
So I want a good short ground contact
and I'm going side to side one key point for all these variations is I want the toes forward so when you come here we're not turning the feet the toe stays forward the whole time so I'm really strengthening up medial ankle here I'm really strengthening up lateral ankle here alright so toes straight forward side to side if you can do that pain free we can start to kind of decrease that assistance a little bit to where I'm maybe just holding for a little bit of balance
And let's work there.
If I can do that pain-free, now I'm gonna go on to level three.
For level three, we have the same setup.
I'm still at six inches, but I removed the hand support.
So now the only additional support I have is this back leg.
And again, I'm light on this back leg.
So this is almost a true unilateral single leg hop, but not quite.
I still have a little bit of pressure in that back leg.
And now I'm just side to side.
quick springy ground contacts, and I'm just getting six inches over and back, okay?
If I can do that pain-free, let's move on to level four.
In level four, we're removing the training wheels, all right?
Now it's time to really get on one leg.
It's a true unilateral hop.
I'm springy side to side.
I'm still only getting six inches, so I'm right here.
i want to maintain that quick ground contact and i'm just back and forth all right true single leg hop so we just went from jv to varsity now let's go division one so level five and of course we've got to be pain free we've got to be feeling good if you are pain free we're going back to that single leg hop but now i'm taking it to 12 inches okay so i move out my markers
You technically don't have to have the markers, but I love to just be able to measure it and know that I'm progressing the right way, and I have a goal with that distance.
So now I'm just single leg back and forth, covering 12 inches, all right?
Nice and springy if I'm pain-free.
Now we're going pro, okay?
This is level six.
At level six, I'm going to 18 inches.
Move my markers out.
Now, as we get further, you can't get off balance.
You can't get sloppy.
If you feel sloppy or you're getting stuck in quicksand, long ground contacts revert back to the previous level.
Master that.
Build up the endurance as well at that level and then move up.
So at level six, now I'm at 18 inches.
And I still got to be nice and springy, short ground contact time.
Do notice the farther I get, I don't want your body to come all the way with you.
So it's not like this because then the foot doesn't really hit the angles that we're trying to work.
We're trying to work these angles, right?
Angles that we really see in sports.
so I got to keep my body relatively in the center and let my foot move so when I'm here I got to think about my shoulders are still in the middle and when I'm here shoulders stay in the middle so it's like my chest doesn't move and it's just the foot going back and forth because if I just jump like this you see how I'm not getting those same angles okay now level 7 if we're a hundred percent pain-free
this is where we go to stud ninja level 24 inches springy back and forth boom same thing keeping that chest in the center and just letting that lower body go back and forth all right so now these angles are getting bigger the forces on the foot and ankle are high and it's rapid loading it's fast loading so this is what really starts to prepare us for sports and keep in mind guys when you go to make a cut if the foot and the ankle give out that's when you see
knee valgus that's when you see achilles problems and acl and other things a lot of it starts from ankle instability in these positions so this is one of the best drills now the only way that i would progress this is i would go a weighted vest most athletes don't get here because we're going higher repetition
But if you're feeling good and bouncy and pain free, there's nothing wrong with starting with a light weighted vest and gradually going up on that weighted vest.
Now in the case of the 1% freak athlete who gets here, they're feeling springy and bouncy and they run out of weighted vest, like they go beyond 20 and their gym doesn't have 20, then we can start progressing by adding some height.
So I could add like a little hurdle.
Say we add like a 6 inch or a 12 inch hurdle right there in the center.
Now I can progress by actually adding a little bit of height along with that distance.
So we'll call those the optional levels.
Let's say level eight is the way to vest.
Let's say level nine would be the height.
And let's say level 10 would be the way to vest and the height over that hurdle.
All right.
But remember, this is extensive plyos.
We're going for high repetition.
So don't try to be Superman and go straight there.
We do want these lower level ground contacts.
And that's what really builds the actual structure of the foot and of the ankle and lower leg.
Let's get to work.
So for our standing vertical jumps, what we're doing here is just working on our standing vertical mechanics.
Nothing fancy, but we have to lay down that foundation right now so that we can set you up for the other jumping phases, the other biometric phases that are going to come in the future.
So I just want you to jump as high as you can.
We're not going to go rapid off the ground.
We're going to land and we're going to stick for one second so that you can kind of self-check and just become aware of your body positioning.
Now, if you can do this in a mirror, great.
If you can film yourself, especially if you can film yourself in slow motion, that's even better.
Okay, so I'm just going to jump as high as I can.
I'm going to stick for one second, and then I'm going to stand up and go again.
Work on jumping as high as you can with perfect mechanics.
If you don't know what perfect mechanics are, of course refer back to the mechanics section and really go in and kind of audit your jumping style and figure out what exactly it is that you're doing wrong.
We're going to lay that foundation right now so that in the future we can really start to get results when we go into our plyometric phase.
For the rear foot elevated progressions, first I want you to prove to yourself that you can master a regular body weight split squat.
And so come into that split squat position.
On this one, make sure that your shoulders stay above the hips.
You can just hold onto bands or hold onto a chair if you need it for some additional support.
and then just drop straight down right so we're here the knee should be kind of right above the toe not beyond the toe on this variation and then I'm coming back up all right see if you could touch that back knee to the ground or just hover it two inches off the floor or put a little pillow or a pad beneath that knee tap
and come back up, all right?
As long as you can do that pain free, and if you can't, you can always use more support with the hands and really deload your body weight.
If you pass that pain free and you're feeling good, then go body weight, and I'm just dropping straight down, regular split squat, all right?
If you can do that pain free, now let's move on to the actual rear foot elevated.
So level three is where the rear foot elevated actually starts.
Let's bring back our assistance.
Some of you guys don't even have to mess with this stage if you're experienced and you've done this before.
But if this is your first time, you might want to use some assistance.
Take a good size step.
Put your hands on the chairs or hold your band.
Put your back foot up and I want the shoelaces down on the bench.
I don't want you curled like this.
Ideally, this bench is going to be below knee height.
If it's above knee height, it's going to be too high.
It's going to be more of a hip flexor stretch than a strengthening exercise.
So take a good size step.
Put your back foot up here.
come down to the floor and ideally you have a little pillow or a pad that you can rest your knee on set up from the bottom up always so this is our start position and i want to get my knee right above my toe okay so i draw a straight line down from the knee it's right above the toe and then from there i lift so i'm here and then i come all the way back down tap that knee or get it about two inches off the floor
and come back down if I master that pain-free I can get rid of my assistance same thing now body weight again reset from the bottom always knees above the toe I don't want all of your pressure on the toes I want equal pressure between the heel and the toes and you're really thinking about kind of pushing through that midfoot and so I'm here
Come back down.
Tap.
Now on this variation, your shoulders aren't going to stay all the way up.
They will tilt forward just a little bit.
So at that bottom position, notice that I have a slight angle.
I'm not all the way over like this.
That'll make it even more hip dominant.
But I'm not all the way up like this.
I'm somewhere in the middle.
Alright, if you master that and you're pain-free, let's move on to the dumbbell stage.
Once you start adding some load, we can always go with a weighted vest as well.
But I like to go with the dumbbells and I just set them up here.
Set up knee above the toe.
And then I go from there.
It doesn't count as your first rep.
That would be your first repetition.
Now, most athletes can stay with the dumbbells for a really long time.
The only way that we're ever going to ditch the dumbbells is if week after week you get so strong that grip strength becomes a limiting factor.
Some of us that will happen, meaning you're no longer really getting a lower body workout because the dumbbells are so heavy.
Let's say you're holding 80 pounds in each hand.
the grip strength is actually the hardest part, so you can't go up any further because the grip strength is the limiting factor.
If you happen to get to that point, which less than 5% of athletes are gonna get there, but if you do, our other option is to, one, add more weight of vest, so I would stay at the 80-pounders, add a weight of vest,
Or I can move on to the Smith machine.
So if you have access to a Smith machine, it's an unbelievable option here.
I don't like a traditional barbell here because getting set up and getting the back leg up with a heavy barbell gets a little bit sketchy.
Also, if you lose balance, it's a little bit too dangerous for me.
The Smith machine provides the additional support that you need to really just produce force and get strong.
We get our balance and stability elsewhere anyways, so we don't need it now.
So I'm coming in my Smith machine.
And I typically want to think about setting up with the very back of my heel underneath the bar.
And for most of you guys, that's going to get you a good position.
Start with just the barbell so you can feel it out a little bit.
You might need to play around with it a little bit to find what that optimal length is with the bench.
You got to feel it out a little bit.
So then if I come down, you'll notice that in this position, my knee ends up right above the toes.
So that's the position that we want to be in.
slight torso lean i'm not completely upright right about here i'm tapping that back knee down to that mat or down to the floor and then exploding back up obviously the weight is going to be pretty heavy so you're trying to move it up fast but you're not going to move it that fast because it's heavy another key point with a rear foot elevated the back leg is a non-working leg you should feel a stretch in the hip flexors
but people start to go heavy and they just push down harder on that back leg.
You really gotta think of it as a non-working leg, like it's just there for a little bit of additional support, but I don't wanna be pushing down.
And if you feel like you are pushing down, then maybe the weight is a little bit too heavy.
I want all of the load on that front leg.
As always, with any variation, start light, feel it out, master the form, and then session after session, we can start to go up.
And this is an exercise that we can get really, really strong on.
And it's a beautiful thing because I'm overloading the legs, but I'm not overloading the spine because it's gonna be about half the weight that we would normally be working with a two-leg squat.
So the spine gets a little bit less load.
The legs actually end up getting more load.
So this is an unbelievable exercise for just building that pure strength.
So here we have a couple options.
If you have the hyperextension machine like this, then we're going to do hyperextension holds with the plate drop.
If you do not have this, then we're just going to get two benches or two boxes and we're going to do a reverse plank.
We're working the same muscles.
So if you don't have this, don't worry.
But if you do have the hyperextension machine, I would start light.
I would start with maybe a 10 or 25 pound plate at the most.
and we're just going to come in and hold in this full extension okay so for hyperextension machine doesn't really mean that we want to go into hyperextension we just want full extension where i'm flat all the way from my head down through the heel okay and contrary to popular belief this isn't really a back exercise this is actually glutes and hamstrings okay so if you're very inexperienced and you have no strength in the post chain and the glute
then you can just hold right here.
You can just hold for about 30 seconds.
That's going to get you a good workout.
If you've been training for a while, maybe for a couple of years, then you can do the plate drop.
So I'm going to hold right here and I'm just going to drop the plate and catch it at full extension.
So it's drop, catch, bring it back up.
Drop, catch, bring it back up.
So every time that I'm dropping the plate and going to catch it, it gives what's called a perturbation.
So it's forcing me down into flexion, but my glutes and my hamstrings are resisting that flexion.
So they're resisting that perturbation, and that's what gets the hamstrings and the glutes and the post chain nice and strong.
So for this, how you count the reps, every time you drop the plate, catch it, and bring it back up, that counts as one rep.
Now, if that's too easy, then yes, you can go up to a 35-pound plate or a 45-pound plate, but for the most part, I would rather see you have just perfect form, stay completely in that full extension, and really just squeeze the boots as hard as you can.
We've never had anybody go above a 45-pound plate because if you're doing this the right way, you're going to really feel that burn in the post chain.
For this exercise, we have a couple different options and a couple progressions that I want you guys to get through.
So first and foremost, we got to make sure that we can do a double leg calf raise.
So standard calf raise, you can put your feet up on a bumper plate, feet close together, or you could do this on a step.
If you have stairs at home, you can put it on a step and hold on to the sides.
Do make sure that you have something to hold on to.
I don't want balance to be the limiting factor here.
So half your foot is on, half your foot is off.
Hold on to something, come down, and come up.
Don't force the range of motion, but if you have the range of motion to drop your heels just below the plate, then that's fine.
A lot of us don't.
A lot of us, when we do drop down here, we might get some Achilles or plantar fascia pain.
Work with what you have, all right?
So it could look like this.
or you could get a little bit of depth a little bit lower and bring the heels down a little bit, okay?
Make sure that we got that.
Can we do 15 calf raises?
For a lot of us, the answer is yes.
If the answer is yes and you don't have any pain, then we go to one leg.
Now with one leg, we really need additional support.
So I like to bring in a bench and use this leg as additional support because if I'm holding on to something now, I have no potential for loading.
I want to keep my hands free so that I can grab dumbbells with both sides, all right?
So I'm using a bench and I'm using a bumper plate.
Same thing, half my foot is on, my heels are off.
This leg, I have some pressure, just enough to balance, and then I'm just doing a calf raise here.
Don't push up with this leg.
This leg is just there for stability.
Most of my weight is on this back leg.
And again, if I have the range of motion, I can drop my heels down a little bit and get some good range of motion.
in sports we definitely do need that range of motion through the calf but again work with what we have don't force anything that you don't currently have now if we can complete the recommended reps so for example let's say the recommended reps for the week is 15 then we move on to the next level that's holding dumbbells so I'm in the same position and now I'm just holding dumbbells to the side and this is the variation that we're gonna stick with for most of this phase
Now, do make sure that you're not making this into a soleus calf raise.
That would be a bent knee.
We do want an extended knee so that we're really working that gastroc muscle, okay?
So now most of us, just each session, try to go up five pounds in each hand, gradually overload, and we can get up until the point where we're holding 60s, 70s, 80s.
Now, at some point, your grip might become the limiting factor.
If we get so heavy that grip becomes a limiting factor, the other option is going to be a Smith machine.
Now if you do pass the dumbbell stage and the grip strength does become a limiting factor, which is probably only 10-15% of you that's actually going to make it here.
If you do make it here and you don't have a Smith machine, I'd rather you not do this with a barbell because you're just going to be too unstable.
The other option would be a leg press.
You can do a regular straight leg calf raise, single leg calf raise on a leg press because you have loading potential there.
But if you do have access to a Smith machine where it locks in, that's going to be our best option because it provides the stability for us.
So now we can really just focus on tissue tolerance and strength of that calf.
You guys know that we get our stability elsewhere.
We get our balance training elsewhere.
We do a much better job than just a unsupported calf raise.
So when we're doing calf raises, we want some extra support so we can just focus on that strength.
So same thing, heel hanging off.
I got the bumper plate right underneath.
So the back part of the bumper plate should be directly underneath the Smith machine.
And then I can just lift this leg up just a little bit, not up 90 degrees, just a little bit here.
And then I can work with my range of motion and just come up, all right?
I'm not exploding too fast.
It's gonna be about half a second to one second up and about a second down.
Now, you might have a natural bend in the knee just a little bit.
That's okay.
You definitely don't want a hyperextended knee, but you also don't want a deep knee bend because that's going to make it into more of a soleus raise.
We're really trying to work that gastroc, so do make sure you keep a relatively straight knee with just a slight bend.
Now, with this exercise, you don't run out of loading potential.
Obviously, just start with the barbell, feel it out, and then you can start to go up 10 pounds on each side, 20 pounds on each side, and you can just keep going as long as your mechanics look really good and as long as you're feeling good and you're not feeling any joint pain, Achilles pain, plantar fascia pain, then we can continue to load throughout the program on this exercise.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So, I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So, it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate that means we are not actually getting all of that air all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs so i want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in okay so we're here in deep through the nose let the stomach rise seven seconds once you finish that seven seconds it's out through the nose
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breaths.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's OK.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you wanna reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
and I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down to the elbows and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
All right, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm going to pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull
this knee as far towards the chest as i can now a lot of you as you pull the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors if that's the case try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here but this is a glute stretch for this left leg but at the same time for a lot of you this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right, so I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically gonna do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm gonna push back like this, I'm gonna straighten out my arms, and now I'm just gonna cross over.
So I'm gonna put my left foot over that right foot, and I'm gonna try to get that right heel
down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one, we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller, and I'm going to cross over this foot, and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center, and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings, and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel
all the way down through the ball of the foot, and I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So for our hamstring floss, we're just gonna go lying on our back.
I wanna make sure that my left leg stays down, so I'm actively pushing this left knee through the ground, pushing my left heel down through the ground, and I'm just gonna pull back.
So here in this position, I'm gonna feel a little bit of a stretch in my glute, a little bit of a stretch in that opposite hip flexor, and then I'm just
Extending that knee and coming back into flexion.
So it's extension, flexion.
So we call this hamstring floss.
We're gradually trying to get that range of motion bigger and bigger.
In each rep, we're trying to extend that knee more and more.
So for the supine kickover, supine means facing up.
So we're laying on our back, and I'm just gonna kick over this way, so I'm basically swinging my leg across.
I am trying to keep that knee as straight as I can, and I'm just gonna tap that toe as high as I can, okay?
And then I'm gonna bring it back the other way, and I'm gonna tap my toe on this side as high as I can.
Okay, so it's over the body and then open it up.
And we're just getting a gradual swing.
Each rep, try to loosen up more and more and really swing that foot as high as we can.
You're going to feel a big stretch on the outside of the hips and I'm going to feel a big stretch on the inside of the legs when I'm opening up to that side.
For our PNF v-sit, basically what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna go in a v-sit position.
I can put my hands down on the floor and I'm gonna sit up as high as I can.
So the first part of this drill is we're gonna actively push our legs as hard as I can.
down into the ground, and you're gonna hold that for seven seconds.
So it's push as hard as you can, you gotta really contract your hamstrings, contract your glutes, and push down into the ground like you're trying to lift your body off the ground.
After seven seconds, get up nice and tall, take a deep breath, and we're just relaxing and stretching down the center.
So I want to get as far forward as I can.
I'm not going to have a big rounded back.
I do want to keep my shoulder blades pinched together and my back nice and flat.
And then I'm just reaching forward as far as I can.
I'm going to hold for 10 seconds.
Now that's one rep.
To finish this set, we need three reps.
So then I'm right back in.
Nice and tall.
Push down as hard as I can.
Seven.
Relax.
Breathe nice and deep.
And then stretch.
down the middle.
If you do want to go for your toes, you could do that as well.
You're still going to be stretching the same muscles.
So you could grab your ankles, pull yourself forward, or you could grab your toes and pull yourself forward as long as you're not rounding that back.
So the contraction allows our muscles to then relax more afterwards.
So that's any type of PNF stretching.
You're going to get more range of motion because our muscles are contracting and always after a hard muscle contraction,
The muscles are primed for that relaxation.
So then when you take a big breath and we relax and stretch, we're going to get a little further than we normally would.
For the 90-90 hip opener, I'm just gonna start in a 90-90 position.
So that means I'm sitting here, I'm gonna roll over towards my left glute, and I'm gonna get in a 90 degree position with that knee, and then this back leg is also gonna be 90 degrees.
So we have 90 here, we have 90 here, and we have 90 here.
Okay, from there, I'm going to square my chest with this knee.
So I'm nice and tall right here.
Now from there, my left hand is back.
I'm going to thread my right arm underneath.
And the ultimate goal is to get the right shoulder down to the floor.
A lot of you might not have that mobility yet, but just get as low as we can comfortably.
So I'm going to thread through.
One, two.
And then I'm going to roll to the next side.
So hand down.
I get into this position, same thing, 90, 90, 90, and then I thread my left hand through, shoulder to the ground.
I should feel that stretch sort of in the outside of the hip, and we're just going to flow straight through.
Okay, so after the desired reps there, then I'm going back to my original position, 90-90.
I'm gonna have both hands on the floor.
I'm gonna keep this leg grounded.
I cannot lift this knee or this ankle off the ground, and I'm just gonna raise as high as I can and back down.
So now it's just an opener.
A lot of you will go here, and the tendency is to open up here.
We gotta stay grounded.
My goal is to get the sole of that foot flat on the floor.
So I want to get all the way flat if possible and back down.
After the desired reps, I'm flowing straight through.
Same thing, I'm down and open.
We should feel that stretch on the opener in here.
So inside of the leg that's grounded, inside of the leg that's moving as well.
Really opening up those hips.
For the hip flexor tilt, I'm just gonna use a box of bench or a chair.
I'm gonna get my back foot up so the top of my foot is on the bench.
I'm not gonna go with my toe on the bench.
Top of the foot on the bench, I'm just gonna come down.
Now I wanna get my heel touching my hips or as close as I can get to that.
If you have a pad, that'd be better.
I wouldn't do this on hardwood.
Make sure you got a nice, soft surface.
So I'm touching.
I'm in a straight line from my knee all the way up through my shoulders.
And I'm just going to sit here.
First, I'm going to get in a good position.
This ankle should be under that knee.
I should already feel a little bit of a stretch in that hip flexor, a little bit in the quad as well.
Now from here, I'm getting nice and wide.
I'm not going to lean forward.
And I'm going arms out.
and together now at the top with straight elbows not bent elbows at the top I'm going to lean towards the lead leg so that's to my right as far as I can hold for five and then come right back okay and then we're hands down all the way up hands together nice and tall elongate through the spine and lean towards that lead leg three two one
back down, and we're back through.
For the kneeling adductor pulse, I'm gonna go half kneel position.
I'm going to point the toe out so I'm not curled.
I'm pointed like this.
Top of the foot is down towards the floor.
I'm gonna go straight out with this leg.
This knee's gonna be nice and straight.
Okay, from here, I'm gonna do some rocks.
So I'm gonna rock straight back.
I need my hips to touch my heels or as close as you can.
And you're gonna really feel that stretch in the adductor and you'll feel a certain angle in that adductor.
And now we're gonna switch that angle by rocking forward.
So I'm gonna rock back one second and then I'm gonna creep the hands forward
nice and far until I get close to full hip extension and then creep it back so when I go forward I get a different angle of those adductors and then when I go back I get the complete opposite side of the muscle so I'm back and I'm forward as far as I can all right make sure in this position
where I'm rocking forward, I'm getting to that full hip extension.
So some people stay tucked right there or some people go too far where they're in hip hyperextension.
I just need to get all the way out until I'm in a straight line from that knee all the way up through that shoulder.
So for the loaded ankle mobility, I'm going to get here nice and tall half kneeling position.
Ankle is underneath that knee.
I'm going to keep that heel down on the ground and I'm going to drive my knee as far as I can over the toes.
I'm aiming for that second toe.
So not over the big toe.
We're aiming kind of down the middle.
Already I feel a little stretch back in my Achilles in the back of the ankle joint.
Now from here, I'm gonna load that position.
So I'm going straight into a step up.
So it's just here, step up, and then we're right back down, reset.
push, drive, get that good ankle mobility, and then from there we step up.
So I don't want you to get there and then come back and step up, I want you to load that max position.
So we're in this max position, we got that good shin angle, and from there we step up.
All right, so we're adding load to our ankle mobility, so we're not just working on ankle mobility, we're also working on stabilizing every degree of range of motion that we attain through that stretch.
So for our standing hip CARS, CARS stands for Controlled Articular Rotation.
So this is a FRC concept, Functional Range Conditioning.
So this is getting us nice and mobile, but building stability at these short and long muscle lengths, which prevents injuries, helps us get more explosive.
So it's a little bit different in your normal type of stretching.
Rule number one, we've gotta create tension through the body, tension through the upper body, so I need you to squeeze the fist and keep a tight core in this whole drill, okay?
From here, I'm just gonna lift up as high as I can with that right knee, and then from there, instead of a normal hip circle where we're down like that, I'm gonna turn the foot outwards, all right?
So I'm gonna turn the foot out, and then I'm gonna kick it around
and bring it down and then I'm gonna reverse that.
So now I'm gonna kick back as far as I can and then I'm bringing it all the way back around.
So I like to pretend like there's a really high fence right here and I gotta step over that imaginary fence.
and then bring it down some of you balance is going to be an issue here it's okay if you want to hold on to something hold on to two poles or hold on to a power rack whatever you got to do all that matters here is that we're getting the full range of motion through that hip joint so i don't want to leave any range of motion left in the tank i want you to really get every single range of motion so that we can build that stability at those ranges and really free up your hips for more movement
For the butterfly liftoffs, I'm just gonna use my shoes.
You could use two cones or you could even play some basketball on each side.
So we're gonna get whatever we're using, I'm going with the shoes.
I'm gonna get it in line with my knees.
So I'm in this butterfly position.
I'm kind of at max range right there.
I can't pull my heels any closer.
And I'm just gonna put,
the shoes in lines with the knees and then the heels of the shoe is going to be in line with the midfoot.
So from here, stage one, if you don't have good mobility or good stability, we're going to place our hands on the floor, get up nice and tall, and then it's just hip liftovers.
So I'm going to lift up over the shoe.
and I'm gonna put my foot down.
Notice how the knee is completely straight, and then I bring it back together, and I'm going with the other side.
Notice as I lift up, I'm not starting to collapse the torso.
The torso never changes.
Put it down.
bring it back now the second level and if you can do this then we're just gonna go straight up we're gonna develop some tension in our arms so squeeze the palms get that core nice and tight and then from there we're doing the same thing lift over put it down come back
and the other side, all right?
So the feeling that you're gonna get on this is not necessarily a stretch.
So this is working on our mobility, but we're feeling more of a little bit of a burn in our hip flexors, almost like a cramp type feel.
You shouldn't be cramping, but you should get that feeling where you're almost gonna cramp
because what we're doing is we're working on the stability in a short-range position.
So a lot of athletes have good stability when they're in their mid-range, but when the hip flexors are in this shortened range, it's really hard to move and stay stable.
So what we're doing is we're working on that short-range stability, which goes a really long way in injury prevention and becoming more athletic.
So for the posterior liftoffs, I'm just going to use my shoes and I'm going to place them at the bottom of my hands.
So wherever my hands reach to, I'm going to place the toe at that level and I'm going to make sure that they're almost touching my thighs.
So they're nice and close to my body.
Now I'm just going to put my arms up here.
I'm going to go 90 degrees here and then I'm going to lift up, bring it out and put it down.
Bring it up and back around.
All right.
So I'm gonna rep it out on this side.
Now notice that I'm not leaving my foot on the inside.
So a lot of people go up and they leave their foot on the inside.
I need you to bring your foot with your knee.
So we're up, around, down, and then bring it back.
All right, and then we're gonna do the desired reps on the other side as well.
So these liftoffs, it's going to be good for the glutes, but it's really working it in a shortened range.
So our muscles aren't very strong when they're in that short range.
So this is training them to be stronger and more stable in that short range of motion.
And that's going to help prevent injuries and help explosiveness in the long term.
my overhead deep squat progression so I'm just gonna start nice and high my feet are a little wider than shoulder width apart and I'm just gonna come into a hamstring stretch okay back nice and flat I get as low as I can hold one two three from here I get my hands to the ground and I'm trying to come into a deep squat I'm gonna hold in this position for three seconds I'm gonna lean forward okay push my knees out with my elbows hold one two three
three, rock back, get my heels down to the ground, three seconds here, and then raise one overhead, raise two overhead, and stand, okay?
So that's one rep, we have three reps, so now I'm cycling straight back into it.
Okay, so it's three seconds there.
Deep squat, three seconds.
Lean forward, three seconds.
Rock it back, three seconds.
One up, two up, stand.
If you can't get in that deep squat position, it's okay.
Let's just try to get as low as we possibly can and gradually get better every time we do this warmup.
For our dead bug rocker series, I can either use a basketball or any type of ball.
You can even use a stability ball if you want to.
Or if that's too easy, then you can use a weighted medicine ball.
Alright, so I'm just going to show you with the basketball for right now.
So I'm going to pin this.
So I'm 90 degrees here with the leg.
I'm going to pin it.
with my elbow and I got to get a good squeeze like I'm trying to squish a bug there.
I want to make sure that my lower back is flat to the floor.
So naturally you get into this position and a lot of you are arched.
I need you to think about if you had a hand beneath you, you're squishing that hand to the floor.
So you posteriorly tilt your pelvis this way to get flat.
all right so now i'm squeezing here and i'm just going to go into full extension so my left side stays still nothing moves my right side is fully extending so go arm and leg at the same time all the way out and back i'm not touching that heel to the floor i'm not touching the hand to the floor all right so i have the desired reps there after i reach my certain reps there then i'm dropping to the left side so with the basketball side
I'm dropping as far as I can, and my whole goal is anti-rotation.
So a lot of you, if your core is weak, as you drop here, that right side's gonna come along with it.
I need you to keep your right side completely still and stable.
Nothing on that right side moves when you do the drop, okay?
We're gonna feel a little bit of a burn, front core, side core, and hip flex.
Once you hit the desired reps there,
then I switch to the other side alright so it's same thing it's full extensions and then it's drops with the other side and then I finish it with a rocker so I go desired reps on one side desired reps on the other side and then I'm just gonna pin it to my knees with my hand and I'm gonna do a rocker so I'm just rocking up all the way and slowly rock back alright rock up all the way
slowly rock back so i'm hitting the desired reps there it's not a sit-up where we're changing the angle of our hips notice from here i'm actually not changing that angle i'm just rocking and then rocking back make sure that you're not using your momentum the drill gets easy when you really just rock fast back and forward what i want you to do is just slowly
come to a stop, and then recreate that momentum.
So this drill is great for core stability, core strength, and we're getting a lot of these core muscles from the internal abdominals to the external abdominals of the front abs and the obliques, and we're even getting a lot of hip flexor work here as well.
For the mini band ankle turns, I'm just going to use a mini band.
You can use a skills mini band right now.
I'm using a perform better mini band, the blue.
So I'm just going to go about shoulder width apart already.
That's kind of pulling me inwards.
So that's what we would call pronation of the foot.
Okay.
So we're going to go through pronation and supination.
So basically I'm going to point my, the soles of my feet out as far as I can.
And then I'm going to point them in as far as I can.
I'm going through that full range of motion right now.
And you should really feel this burn a little bit in the feet muscles, but also up and kind of the shins and the lower leg muscles, especially out here on the lateral aspects of the leg.
Now, when I go in, I don't want to collapse in too much.
So I do want to keep my knee in line with my feet.
And naturally when you pronate, they are going to collapse a little bit, but I don't want you to over exaggerate and really collapse in like that.
So if you don't have a mini band, you can come back to your pro band and just still go two legs here and here, here and here.
Of course, afterwards we would have to switch over to the other leg.
and do the same thing.
So we're really strengthening up the lateral aspects of the ankle.
We're working on the arch, the intrinsic muscles of the feet.
We should feel a burn sort of on the outside of the ankle here and probably a little bit on the top of the foot and in the arch as well.
So for the DaVinci plank, I'm gonna use a cable machine.
If you don't have a cable machine, we could use a band.
And if you don't have a band, then we're gonna go with the side plank with a leg raise, which I'll show in a second.
But if we have that cable machine, right now I'm going on 100 pounds because I've been doing this for a long time.
I would really say start very light.
Start all the way at 30 pounds.
Try it out, see how it feels.
If it's easy, then go up and up and up until we can find that perfect weight.
but so i'm gonna set this up where the cable is in line with my mid chest now i'm just going to step out i'm going to pick it up take a step out i'm in this wide stance my chest is right over my pelvis so i'm not leaning shoulders nice and flat now from there i'm going to lift up this outside foot so i'm going to lift up my left leg about an inch off the ground and i'm just stabilizing so
I got to stabilize with this right leg, but more importantly, this left side of the core right now is fired up.
And I'm going left arm out.
My shoulders should be completely flat.
Most of you naturally will be here.
I need you to fight with that core to get your shoulders flat.
And we're holding, we're feeling that in the left oblique.
We'll feel it a little bit in the right oblique and the core as well.
but mostly on that left side of the core.
And then after we're done, make sure that you walk it back in.
Don't just let it pull you back in, of course.
So if we don't have the cable machine, we could use a band.
I'm using a one inch Perform Better band.
Hook it up to a tree or to a power rack or something nice and stable.
I'm gonna pull out
as far as I can really to get some really good tension on that.
And then I'm gonna pull that right foot up.
Of course, that outside foot's always the one that comes up.
Other arm's straight out.
And I'm just holding in that position.
So that's actually not enough tension.
I'd have to go a little further.
And then from there, pull up.
and I'm not letting that band pull me in, so I'm staying nice and strong with that right oblique, and I'm flat with the shoulders.
I'm consciously squeezing the core in this position for the full duration of the set.
Now, if you don't have the cable or the band, then you're just gonna go in a side plank position, and you're gonna get nice and flat.
So option one is bent knees, stack them together, stack the legs.
Get nice and flat here and then we're just going to lift this leg, stay nice and flat through that knee all the way through the shoulder.
I'm feeling that on the inside, so I'm feeling that on the right side of the core.
I'm going to feel that in the hips here.
I'm going to feel that in my right hip as well.
I can just get this other arm and hang out in this position nice and strong and stable.
If that is too easy, then go straight leg.
And we're up nice and flat from the feet all the way through the shoulders.
Squeeze that core.
And then we're just going to lift here and other hand up.
All right.
one of the best ways to strengthen up the muscles of our feet and the muscles of our toes is Michael Jackson leans.
So all we're doing is our best impression of Michael Jackson, and we're just gonna plant our feet, keep my heels down on the ground, and I'm just gonna lean forward as far as I can, keeping the hips flat,
and press back okay so over time you're going to get better and better at this and you're going to be able to lean a little further and further each time now the further we lean the more the toes got to dig into the ground to stabilize you so that you don't fall flat on your face so we should feel a burn through the toes and through the midfoot now make sure that the heels stay down on the ground a very common uh
fault on this exercise is people lean forward and their toes or their heels start to lift off the ground.
We got to keep the heels down, lean and push back with your toes.
So for our rip through Palof press, I can either use a cable or if you don't have a cable, then you can just use a band that's hooked up to something nice and stable.
So I'm going to use a cable here.
I'm going to use a normal cable handle.
I'm going to interlock my fingers.
I want this cable to be about belly button or a little higher.
It needs to be somewhere between belly button and chest height.
So I'm going to bring it out a little bit.
I'm going to start in a normal stance, almost like a triple threat position.
Kind of pretend like you have a basketball here, and it's going to be step and rip through.
So it's kind of a jab and a rip through to that opposite knee.
I don't need to be 100% of my explosiveness here, maybe 80, 85%.
But if I go too fast, this cable is going to kind of jerk up and down, and we don't want that right now.
We're just gonna go about 80-85% of our max explosiveness.
Boom, and then I'm gonna keep my elbows straight, and I'm gonna bring it to the center, and then back down to that knee, and then I'm back to that start position.
Okay, so I got the ball on that outside shoulder, hard rip to the left knee, stabilize for a second.
elbows straight, right in front of that chest, back down to that knee, and then I'm coming back.
Now the most common mistake here is people going here, keeping the elbows bent and bringing it here, and then we don't get that anti-rotation of the core.
So if I go here and then I really straighten out, then that cable is pulling me this way and I gotta resist that and keep my chest forward and my hands right in front of my chest, so I'm really firing up those core muscles.
as always we want to start light you may you might start 10 or 20 pounds and as you get better we're gonna go up and up and up and we want to go basically as heavy as we can with great form I don't want to see that form breaking down we're gonna do the
desired reps to one side and then I'm gonna flip the other way and then you're going to that right knee same exact thing so this exercise is great for not only core strength but it's functional core strength this really translates to sports you've got to be able to get to that position and then build that anti rotation because a lot of times you go to rip through and you get jammed up you get a bump from somebody and you start to fly into rotation
But if you can maintain your posture and you can push through that contact, then you're going to be dominant on the court.
So many people are held back because there's players that on the court, they're giving you a bump to one side of the body and we lose our posture.
We've got to be able to keep that chest forward and get to where we want to go.
And it all starts with strength drills like this.
So for the independent toe raises, we're gonna wanna go barefoot.
If you can, go without socks as well.
So first, I'm just gonna make sure that I got that good arch in my foot, so I'm on my three points of contact, ball of the foot, ball of the pinky foot, and heel.
From here, I'm gonna raise my big toe as high as I can, and I'm gonna get my other four toes down.
So I'm gonna hold for three seconds, and I'm pushing these other four toes as hard as I can into the ground.
So one, two, three, and then I'm gonna switch.
Now I'm gonna push my big toe down, and I'm gonna raise my other four toes as high as I can, and I'm pushing my big toe down as hard as I can right now.
One, two, three, switch.
One, two, three, switch.
Okay, so this is working on those intrinsic muscles of the feet.
Now, a lot of you don't have the ability to do this right now because you have no control over your feet because you've been wearing stiff-soled basketball shoes for so long.
If that's the case, you need to manually hold them down.
So I would grab something to sit on,
And I'm showing you one at a time.
Normally you would do this two at a time though.
Okay.
So normally we want to go unassisted if possible.
If you can't do that, I'm going to hold these toes down and I'm going to raise my big toe.
Okay.
And then after three seconds, I'm going to hold or push my big toes down and I'm going to lift my other four toes.
All right, so this is gonna kind of neurologically train you to move your toes independently without each other.
And then after a couple weeks, you should be able to take away the manual pressure and just do it normal.
Okay, this is gonna have a huge impact on your overall athleticism and your injury prevention long-term.
So this drill seems like it's kind of weird, kind of easy.
You might feel like you're gonna cramp.
It feels very different.
Keep in mind, these are the things that go a long way for your long-term athleticism.
For the reach-through turns, I'm gonna go push-up position.
I'm gonna reach my right leg under as far as I can.
Notice that knee's not bent, it's nice and straight.
Now from here, I'm gonna turn up to the sky, look all the way up, and back down, and then back to push-up position.
Now I go left leg through.
we get it up nice and high we're not going to shortchange it down here so get it high knee is straight already i should feel a stretch in my hip kind of through the it band area now from here i'm turning up the other way and i'm just going to cycle through this we should feel a little bit of a burn in the core but it's more so full body mobility so we're going to get a lot of mobility through the hips and through the spine and we're going to get that uh that core activation as well
So for the one leg turns, I'm basically gonna come into a single leg RDL.
So that means a slight bend in the knees.
I'm just gonna come down.
I want the back leg parallel to the floor.
I want my torso parallel to the floor.
First, let's just hold in this position.
And if this is hard for you, then just hold here and let's work on that.
Now, if you can, we're gonna go arm straight and I'm gonna turn as high as I can.
ideally getting my hand pointed up to the ceiling and then I'm coming back down and I'm going the other side this side is a lot harder for most people and we're back down switch to the other side and I'm just gonna rep out there now for a lot of you that's gonna be too difficult off the bat so if that's the case then let's just hold in this position and we'll just go for 25 seconds
And just focus on getting that stability.
Now, if that's too easy and the other version is too hard, then just go baby turns.
So just start to work on turning the shoulders a little bit.
We're adding a little bit of chaos to that single leg stability.
And then gradually over time, day after day, we're going bigger and bigger.
If we can stabilize in this position and add chaos to that single leg stability and start to get big turns, we're going to be very, very stable on one leg.
And that's going to show up in our cuts, in our vertical jump, and in our speed.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary, just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm going to go five cycles and then I'm going to switch to the other side.
Five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down.
I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that
stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip and now I land I turn this foot forward I pivot I'm here knee a couple inches off the floor I'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two, three.
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
All right.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
one, two, three, lean, one, two, three, heels back down, one, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back,
hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my mid foot right now.
and now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult, but if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers.
and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
For our penultimate acceleration, what we want to do is just hook up to a band, make sure that band is hooked up to something stable like a power rack, and all I'm going to do is accelerate through that penultimate step, okay?
So if I'm simulating jumping right-left, I got to drive off this left foot and get as far as I can with it.
Remember, it's that reverse sling, so as that right foot goes up, the arms go back, okay?
Boom!
And really push through that band and work on that acceleration and that explosiveness into the penultimate.
Remember on the penultimate, we're trying to cover distance, we're trying to do it explosively, and we're trying to drop the hips low so that when we step into that jump position, we're at the bottom position of the jump and we can go straight up.
What we can't do is take that weak penultimate and then we have to lower from there and get up.
Time is valuable.
Every millisecond has to be spent on accelerating through the jump instead of having to eccentrically drop and then get up.
So I need you to drive through this band, create distance and drop the hips nice and low.
We do the desired reps on one side and then I go to the other side.
So now it's a left right and I'm driving off of this right foot.
Notice I'm not even jumping because if that band tension is high and you jump, you're getting pulled back.
We don't even want to do that.
I just want to simulate the jump so I can come up to the toes and I want to work on that acceleration through the penultimate.
So for my mechanics primer, I'm working on three aspects of jumping mechanics all in one drill.
So I'm doing four reps on all of these.
So the first one, we're working on the arms.
The arm swings 10 to 20% of your overall vertical jump height, so we have to get the arms right.
The biggest mistake that athletes make is they go short
with that counter movement arm swing.
When it comes to max jump height, we want a big arm swing.
So arms stay straight, pinky is at least even with the earlobe at the top of that backswing.
So for this first one, I'm going to stay completely stiff through the torso.
So I'm going to brace that core and then we're going to do what I call Gumby arms.
We're going to really relax our arms and then we're just going to swing.
Alright, so one, two,
three, four, we're getting them as high as we can.
We're working on that dynamic shoulder mobility.
Now from there, after those four, we're gonna use a speed drop.
So I still want the pinky at least at earlobe level and we're dropping down as fast as I can into the jump.
I'm not gonna actually take off, I'm just working on that drop and then I'm coming up to the toes.
Okay, so it's here, drop.
Get up to the toes, all right?
Drop as fast as you can, get up to the toes.
So we're working on that eccentric rate of force development, so that's how fast we can stop ourselves and reverse back up.
So I want you to think about your normal jump mechanics, but right now I want you to focus on two things.
Speed drop, don't just let gravity take you down.
I want you to attack the floor.
So go down fast, but then also keep that arm swing high, all right?
Four reps there.
Okay, and then the last one is the penultimate stride.
So one of the most important aspects of jump mechanics.
So I'm going to step, the penultimate step is the second to last step.
So if I'm planting right left, the penultimate step is that right foot stride.
So I want you to think about distance.
If I take a short step, my hips are here.
If I take a long step, my hips are now down here.
So I lowered my hips, I lowered my center of gravity, so now when I step in, I'm already at the bottom position and it's straight up.
So for right now, I want you to focus on distance.
So I gotta push off this left leg hard to cover distance.
So I want you to think about the distance and the big arm swing and not collapsing our torso too much.
You can have a little collapse, but we want that torso pretty vertical on that penultimate step.
So I'm just going a right-left plant.
Get up to the toes.
You don't need to jump yet.
Turn around and we go back.
Now it's left-right.
Okay?
So that's one rep.
I'm doing four of these.
So now I come back.
Right-left.
left, right.
Okay, so this drill is a mechanics primer.
We gotta really, really work on those mechanics so that we can put ourselves in good positions to produce optimal power.
Let's get it.
So for our penultimate max touch, all we're doing is taking a two-step.
So as always, refer back to the mechanic section.
With the penultimate, we don't want to gradually walk into the jump.
I want to stride, and I really want to push and accelerate through that penultimate step.
So if I'm going right and left,
pushing off this right foot as far as I can, which is going to lower my center of gravity.
It's going to get me into that jump position nice and low so that everything is up from there.
Okay?
So what I want you to work on is really covering distance with that two-step and then just get up as high as you can.
If you're on the court, try to rip off the rim, try to dunk the basketball or touch as high as you can on the backboard.
If you don't have anything to reach for, then just do the penultimate and jump as high as you can.
So we do the desired reps on right-left, and then we come back and we do the desired reps on left-right.
So for the penultimate hurdle hop, I'm gonna set up four hurdles, and for me, I'm gonna set them up about 12 feet apart.
Now, the better we get at this drill, the further we can set them up.
So the whole goal is to create as much separation as I can with that penultimate step.
So remember, if I'm right-left jumping, the penultimate is that right foot, which is gonna lower my hips and lower my center of gravity, okay?
So I'm gonna jump as high as I can over the first hurdle.
Now as soon as I land, I'm going to use that energy from the floor to push myself into that next step.
Okay, so it's going to be a jump here.
As soon as I land, I'm just popping right into that right left.
So now I'm going to take off jump, land, push.
Okay, the whole time I'm using that arm swing.
This drill is all about timing, all about coordination, and all about getting big distance with that step.
Let's look at it full speed.
Now once we complete one side of right, left, we're gonna bring it back the other way, left, right.
So now the penultimate stride is the left foot.
We gotta stride as far as we can, cover that distance with the left foot, and then recover right foot, get up as high as we can.
So for our 15 foot approach jump, all we're doing is measuring out 15 feet and then jumping and touching as high as we can.
So I can go on the basketball court and just start at the free throw line and then aim to touch the rim.
Or if you can already touch the rim, try to dunk.
If you can already dunk, try to do a dunk that you've never done before, okay?
All we're concerned about is getting as high as you possibly can on every rep.
This is an opportunity for you to work on your jumping mechanics.
So I just want you to start with a lean.
So you're gonna kind of start with a lean and then fall into it and then take that recovery step.
So that's gonna help us build up our acceleration.
And most of us are probably gonna get three steps.
So if I was jumping right, left,
Then I would lean and I would take a step with my left.
So then it's left, right, left, take off.
Now everybody's different.
Maybe you can get four steps or five steps based on your leg length and your speed.
But most of us will probably get three or four.
So after the certain amount of reps with right, left, we're gonna go to the other side, and then it's lean, fall, right, left, right, get up as high as we can.
Use this as an opportunity to work on your form, and if you can, film yourself or have a friend film you so that you can look at your mechanics afterwards.
So for the one foot approach touch, all we're gonna do is start as far back as you want.
So you could start three, you could start NBA three, or even beyond.
I want you to build up max speed and go off one foot, touch as high as you can, or work on dunking, or if you can already dunk, work on doing something that you've never done before, okay?
We wanna use this as an opportunity to work on your single leg jump mechanics.
When it comes to taking off one leg,
Strength matters, but what matters more is mechanics and practice.
So really use this as an opportunity to get good quality reps, and that's what's gonna take your single leg jump to the next level more than any other exercise we do.
So for the high knees, I'm going about 60 to 70 percent, nothing too fast.
And I'm just going to get my thighs up parallel to the floor.
I'm going to pump the arms in the opposite way.
So when my right leg is up, my left hand is up and I'm just going to get that blood flowing.
I'm going to stay on the balls of my feet so my heels are never hitting and I'm just quickly popping off the ground.
We're going to get the muscles going, going to get our blood flowing and get prepped for this workout.
Okay, so for the wall side series, I'm just gonna hold on to the wall.
I wanna be in water, that's about belly button height, and I'm just gonna go side swing.
So I'm swinging my leg, I'm gonna keep my knee pretty straight, I'm gonna keep my foot dorsiflexed.
So that means I'm not pointing the toes down, I'm pulling the toes up, so I should not be hitting my feet on the floor.
And I'm going to explosively go in as high as I can and then explosively go out with that leg as high as I can like I'm trying to get it out of water on both sides.
This is going to really fire up those hip muscles, all those little hip stabilizer muscles and the abductors and adductors are going to start to really get activated.
So for our explosive flexion extension, what I'm going to do is I'm actually going to start with my knee high, thigh around parallel to the floor.
I'm going to get a little bit of a lean into this wall and I'm going to really explode into extension.
So full hip extension, almost like a donkey kick.
As hard as I can, I need to come to full extension like I would in a sprint.
And now from there, I'm going to quickly reverse it and come right back into flexion.
So I'm coming right back to that thigh parallel knee high position.
Okay, I'm going to take a one to two second pause there and then I'm going to go again, really gear up, really visualize between each rep and then explode as fast as you can through the water.
So it's donkey kick, right back and pause.
Extension, flexion, pause.
I want you to really transition quickly from extension into flexion just like you would in a jump or just like you would especially when you're sprinting.
You've got to extend and then quickly flex to drive that knee back up for that next stride.
We're going to be really working the glutes here.
We're really working the hip flexors and we're working them very, very quickly just like we work them in sprinting and jumping.
So for the hip openers, I'm going to drive my knee up so that my thigh is parallel to the floor.
And then from there, I'm going to aggressively open it up as far as I can without rotating my pelvis.
So I don't want you to open up and then all of a sudden start rotating that way.
I want to keep my chest and my hips squared off to this wall.
And I'm just going to use that leg to really open up and work on that range of motion.
I'm going to explode back in and then I'm going to explode down.
Okay, so that's one rep.
So it's explode up, explode out, explode in and explode down.
And this is going to really fire up those little hip muscles that we don't normally work.
Abductors, adductors, internal and external rotators.
All of these muscles are super important for on-court explosiveness.
And these are the muscles that we don't really get to work as much in the weight room.
So for my internal, external rotations, I'm just going to sit with my feet in the water.
Water's coming about halfway up on my shins.
I'm going to hold my knee in place.
So I don't want this knee to move at all.
I don't want to start going here.
I want this knee to stay stationary.
I want the hip to stay stationary.
and I'm just rotating.
So think about bringing the foot as far as I can this way, and then as far as I can that way.
So we're going internal, external rotation, and I'm going explosive as I can.
So I'm just getting it going, big speed.
keeping that knee nice and stable.
I'm not moving in and out.
I'm strictly rotating through the hip to get my foot through water as fast as I can.
Now, this is really training that explosiveness and the mobility of our internal and external rotators of the hip.
And we don't get the opportunity to train these internal-external rotators that often in the weight room because there's not that many ways that we can load it.
So this is a very good way to get some strength, get some speed and explosiveness in those internal and external rotators, which go a long way with first-step explosiveness, with lateral movements, and ton of movements that we see in sports.
So for our sprinter kicks, what I want to do is basically simulate the stride of a sprint, and now it's not going to be exact because we're not on land, but what we want to do here is really just work the hamstrings, work the hip flexors in a similar position that we would be seeing in an all-out sprint.
okay so what i want to do is i'm thinking about high toe high knee okay so i'm going big range of motion even exaggerating it a little more than you might get in a real sprint and think about bringing the toe up even with the opposite knee or over that opposite knee and then from there i'm going to straighten out the knee and i'm just going to kick as hard as i can as explosive as i can back into that cycle so we're going full cycles
Similar to a sprint, I'm pumping the arms so when the left knee is high, my right hand is high.
We're going as fast as we can.
And again, we are exaggerating that range of motion more than we would even get in a sprint because I want to teach you to get strong at your end range of motion because that's where most of the injuries happen is when we're at that end range of our muscle length.
okay so i want you to exaggerate it get the knee high extend the knee and then pull back forcefully now make sure that you do keep your foot dorsiflex so if you point your toe down you're going to hit it on the bottom of the floor i need you to pull your toes up as high as we can pull your feet up this way and then work from there
So for my foot cross jump, you can either do this without a line or if you have a line in your pool, I would straddle that line.
And then from there, I'm gonna go crossover, back to neutral, crossover the other way, back to neutral.
And then on that one, I'm popping off the ground as high as I can, as quick as I can.
Okay, so it's over cross, back to neutral.
over cross back to neutral and hop off the ground okay so full speed that's cross cross jump cross cross jump all right we got to get as quick as we can over that line and don't start going really small because still keep the feet spread and get a full range of motion and then as soon as the feet get back after that second cross you got to really pop off the ground with that minimal knee bend and get as high as we possibly can
This is a great drill for working on your quickness, working on things like crossover steps, which we use so often in all sports, especially basketball.
And we're working on coming from these different footwork positions to getting up in the air, getting vertically.
So many people can jump high when it's the perfect scenario, but when their feet are coming out of a cross or they're coming out of a lateral slide or they're coming off a step back, they can't get their feet set and quickly pop off the ground.
That's what this drill is going to work on.
So for my one leg linear quick hops, basically what I'm doing is I'm gonna start with my left knee high, my right hand up, and now I'm just gonna jump off this right leg and I'm gonna drive the right knee just so that my thigh is parallel to the floor and then I'm back down and I'm moving forward with each step.
In this first one, it's all about speed.
So I don't care about getting out of water, I just need to get this right thigh
parallel to the floor and back down as quick as I can.
Okay, so it's here.
Drive, drive, drive, drive.
All right, and I'm just moving forward with each step.
It's all about that speed that we can get the knee up and get that foot back down and then pop forward a little bit with each step.
So what this drill is doing is it's really teaching us to pop off the ground nice and quick, nice and reactive.
And I'm really getting that good knee drive.
So I'm getting a ton of good explosive hip flexor work.
And then I'm getting a ton of good glute and hip extensor work as I'm pushing back down.
Of course, the water is resisting my leg in multiple directions that we wouldn't normally get in the weight room.
So it's a really great way to train and build explosiveness here in that flexion extension pattern.
Now for the one leg linear hops, we're not going for speed.
We're now going for height.
So it's the same exact thing as with the quick hops.
But now I'm jumping off my right leg and I'm going to drive it as high as I can out of water.
So I want to get my knee all the way out of water and then back down.
Okay.
So as I jump and I'm driving that right knee, I'm going back with the right hand.
I'm going up with the left hand.
And then as I land, we're back.
Now, I don't want you to get stuck in quicksand on the floor.
I still want you to pop off the ground quick, but the number one priority of this drill is jump height.
So even if it takes you a little bit longer to get off the ground, I just want you to think about getting your knee as high as you can out of water.
If you can get it a foot out, great.
If you can get it two feet out of water, even better.
Just get as high as you can, and we're moving forward with each step.
Now this drill is great for developing our single leg vertical jump.
Of course, the water is resisting us, but we are getting a very similar joint angle that we would be getting on a single leg takeoff.
On a single leg takeoff, we can't load up super low.
on this drill since we are trying to get off the ground quick we are getting a very similar angle where we can't load too low we're kind of getting this minimal knee bend and then we're creating maximum power even though we have that small knee bend so it's very specific to how we're working on the court with a single leg jump and then it's also really developing hip flexor on both sides it's developing hip extensor on both sides
and we're just getting a ton of muscle activation and power development out of this drill.
So for our single leg pause jumps, I'm going to stay on the ball of my foot.
So I never want to hit my heel on this drill.
And I'm just going to start low, actually lower than I would in a normal single leg takeoff because here we're working on concentric power.
So I want to start ball of the foot.
I want my chin just out of water.
And then I'm going to go opposite hand up.
Pretend like you have the ball in this hand and you're going to go up for a dunk.
So pretend like there's a string between the elbow and the right knee.
I'm going to explode, jump off my left leg, and I'm going up for a dunk with the right hand.
I'm coming right back down, and I'm pausing in that same position.
Okay, so I'm here.
One, two, drive.
Get that big baseline dunk, and then we're right back.
One, two, go.
Drive.
Right back down.
One, two.
Drive.
I got to get as high as I can.
And here's the thing.
You're going to really start to burn in the quads and a little bit in the glutes and the calves on this exercise.
I need you to maintain explosiveness throughout the set.
It's a little bit higher rep.
than what we do on a lot of our other plyometrics.
So I want you to take this as an opportunity to teach your body how to maintain explosiveness when we're tired instead of only being fresh for two or three reps and then giving out.
All right, so for our flutter fatigue jumps, basically what I want to do is I want to get your legs nice and fatigued, and then I want to work on explosiveness while we're nice and fatigued.
Now, we don't do a lot of this in the program, but it is super important because we have to be able to also jump high in the fourth quarter and have that explosion capacity.
So what we're going to do, we're going to tire out your legs here, 15 seconds all out, as quick as we can, short flutter kick.
So I'm leaning back on the side, and I'm going to bring my legs up.
And I'm going to go small flutters, as small as I can, as fast as I can to keep my body floating.
So I'm here.
I'm going all out for 15 seconds.
As soon as I'm done, I step away from the wall and I'm jumping.
Okay, as soon as I'm done with my five jumps, I come right back to the wall without resting and I'm right back in 15 second flutter.
Okay, so if I do a flutter and then the five jumps, that's only one rep.
So then look at the reps that I wrote out and so say it's five reps, that means you have five cycles back and forth and back and forth until you're done.
So it's not going to be do flutters, take a break, do jumps.
This is going to be very rapid.
No breaks straight through.
Should build up some fatigue.
Should learn how to become explosive while our legs are nice and fatigued and have that lactic acid build up.
Alright, so welcome to our deload day.
Now, you might be saying, I feel good, my muscles are fine, my nervous system's good, I'm not overtrained, but there's other systems within the body that could be overtrained and you don't even know it.
For example, the fascia, a lot of times we keep pounding and pounding and we're losing fascial elasticity and we're drying out the fascia and that leads to decreased explosiveness and efficiency and vertical jump.
and so it's good after four hard weeks of training to take a couple days of deload so i'm assuming you got the four weeks consecutively without taking breaks and then you took saturday sunday off now we're going to take monday and tuesday as our deload and then we're going to get back in wednesday and hit it hard now if you had vacations or you didn't do the last four weeks consecutively then maybe you can skip the deload and go straight into the
the intense workout.
If you want to do that, go to Friday's day and you're going to replicate that today on Monday.
Go to Thursday's workout and you're going to replicate that on Tuesday.
If you are on the deload days, the rules are you need one alternative sport.
Okay, so if you're a basketball player, I want you to go do something different that involves cutting, that might be an aerobic workout, something where you have fun.
The key is you've got to introduce your body to different movements and you need to have fun.
So on my D-Load, I like to go play tennis or handball, racquetball, something like that.
Whatever you want to do, just make sure it's not some sort of crazy dangerous sport that you're going to get injured with because I need you healthy for the rest of this program.
One sport, okay, we need one massage day.
So either go get a massage or self massage, foam roll, kind of take the foam roll workout we've been doing and just extend that and just do twice the amount of reps or twice the amount of length on each muscle group.
We need one mobility or flexibility workout.
Now you could do the mobility day or you could go do a yoga class.
You could go do hot yoga, whatever you want to do.
I do advise that you do something different.
Just to kind of keep it fresh in your mind because the key is on the deload, I don't want you to be doing the same stuff that we've been doing the last four weeks.
And then the fourth thing that we need is an aerobic workout.
So if the sport that you went and played like tennis was enough aerobically and you got a good sweat, then you can skip this part.
But if you feel like you didn't get a great aerobic workout, then go for a jog, very slow pace, anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes.
A huge part of recovery is your aerobic base.
The better our aerobic base, the faster and the better we're going to be able to recover and adapt.
Alright, so those four things.
Alternative sport, self massage or go get a massage.
mobility or yoga or some type of stretching routine and an aerobic workout all right we need to do that on Monday and then we're going to do that again on Tuesday by Wednesday every system within the body is going to be fully recovered and we're ready to get after it I understand some of you might be in season of course you got to go do your practice you got to go do your skills training I just want you I just want to give you a little break
from the weight room and I want your fascia to just fully recover so that we can get it hydrated and we can also get that elasticity where we need it to be for max explosiveness.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for phase two, day three.
Already very short and efficient.
We really shouldn't have to skip anything.
If we do skip something, it would be the partial leg press.
We're getting plenty of strength work on Monday and Friday.
I put that in there just to squeeze in a little bit of strength work.
But this day is mostly about that sprint and about the reactive plyos that we're doing and the 10-minute freestyle dunk session.
That's what's most important here.
So if you don't have the time, skip that partial leg press.
Make sure that we do the 7-Eleven breathing as always.
And if we're already flexible, we can skip that static stretch.
Let's do it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we can cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
And I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 37.
on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go over with the left leg.
I'm gonna come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom.
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
one, two, three, lean, one, two, three, heels back down, one, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm going to get a really good isometric contraction and I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for our top end speed workout, we're going to keep it very efficient and simple.
The reason why we're doing this is top end sprint speed exposes the body to a lot of things that we don't get anywhere else, right?
Like building the proper stiffness through the Achilles and through the quad tendon and the proper compliance through the hip flexor tendons.
And it kind of builds the tendons exactly how the human body was meant to be.
And we can't get that through doing basic mobility, basic static stretching.
and also the ground contact times are so fast that we have to learn how to apply force quicker and quicker and quicker and so we're not just getting faster when we work on top end sprint speed we're also going to improve our vertical jump especially off one leg because the ground contact time is so short
Now, if you're on a track, basically mark out 54 meters.
I do 54 meters because it's about a quart and a half, and so that's what I have our guys do, and they've got some pretty good results off that.
So mark out 54 feet, and then halfway put another cone.
All right, so you have a cone here, you have a cone halfway, and then you have a cone at that 54 meters.
So for this phase, we have six sprints.
All right, so it's six sets of one with a break in between.
For the first one, I want you to accelerate at 50%.
So start split stance, and you're just going to accelerate at 50%.
Once you hit the cone, you're going to then accelerate to 75%.
So we're not all out yet.
all the way through that 54 meters, walk it back nice and slow, take a minute, take as long as you need.
Once you feel good to go, we're back in for that second set.
Now, we're accelerating at 75%, and then I want you, once you hit that first cone, go up to 90%, alright?
Walk it back.
Now the next one, I want you to accelerate at 90%.
Once you hit the first cone, boost it up to 100%.
So that's the first one where we're all out walking back.
The last three are 100% all the way through.
If you have a friend, keep time, try to beat your time, all three reps, because we need max intent.
I need you going as fast as you possibly can.
Week after week, we should be decreasing our sprint time.
Now, if you cannot get it on a track, I really advise trying to find somewhere where you have that long distance because if you have to do this on a basketball court, that's okay, but you can't reach true top end speed on a basketball court, right?
By the time we get out of acceleration and we start to raise up into that top end speed, we're already almost getting to that baseline.
So we already have to decelerate and change directions.
And so that's a huge thing in basketball and volleyball.
We never are exposed to top end speed because everything is acceleration.
But like I said, it's so beneficial to train top end speed because it translates to other qualities such as single leg jumping.
I really advise trying to find the space.
If you have to do it on a basketball court, then go ahead and just accelerate early and try to get as fast as we can early on and sprint through the baseline, walk it back.
You can go up to 10 sets instead of just doing six sets.
So for our bound two-foot takeoff combo, first of all, I'm going for distance and height.
So if you're doing it on a basketball court, I would start just inside the high school three-point line, heels on the line.
I'm gonna start with a broad jump, all right?
So I'm rocking the arms back, I'm getting a good torso angle, I'm jumping as far forward.
Now, instead of landing on two, I'm gonna land on one, and I'm gonna stay stiff with that foot and spring into that next bound.
So I'm gonna jump,
I'm going to land right, and then I'm going to jump to my left, and from my left, I get straight into my penultimate step, so then it's right, left, take off, all right?
So we're building a ton of explosiveness, stiffness, reactive strength.
Most importantly, we're building that rhythm into the two-foot takeoff.
So it would be as far as I can, right, left, right, left, take off.
Off this left foot, I don't want you to think about a bound where you're getting as far as you can.
I just want you to get a little bit of distance and kind of build that rhythm into that long penultimate stride.
If you're doing it on the court, the further out we can get, the better.
So if I'm good there and I can get up and, you know, say you can only touch the backboard, if you can get up and touch the backboard, then okay, cool, let's move it back.
Let's go NBA three and then let's move it back a couple feet.
If you can get back close to the circle at the half court line, that's pretty impressive, all right?
I do want you to get max jump height, though, so I need you to touch as high as you can.
Let's say you can already touch the rim.
You need to do this with a basketball, all right?
And I need you to get up there and throw down some dunks, try some different dunks that you've never worked on before, and let's try to really push ourselves to get that max jump height.
So, of course, we're going to switch sides on this.
So if I said three sets of two, that means two broad right, left, right,
two of those, and then two on the other side to complete one set.
So then the other side would be just the opposite.
So it would be off two, land left, right, left, right, turn stance that way, get up probably left hand.
for our power skip single leg takeoff.
This is a fun combination exercise that builds single leg jumping ability, single leg explosiveness, and builds rhythm into our single leg takeoff.
So what I wanna do is I wanna get four total skips.
So if I'm starting at half court, if I'm skipping far forward, I'm not gonna be able to get in four skips and an approach.
So I need to think about getting up and just getting forward a couple feet with each step.
Okay, so I'm high as I can,
jump right, land right, straight into that next stride, jump as high as I can.
And then after my four, so two each side, I land and I take off as fast as I can straight into that single leg takeoff.
Again, if you can touch the rim, get up and try to grab the rim.
If you can already grab the rim, do it with the basketball and try to end with the dunk, all right?
Challenge yourself on that portion.
So if we had three sets of two,
it would be left lane line going off the left foot and then it would be two on the right lane line coming middle going off the right foot.
Now for our freestyle dunks, I put this in there because it's so important that you get out there and just allow your body to explore different approaches, different type of dunks, different type of jumping styles without me always trying to put you in a box and trying to get you to do one thing.
So I want you to set the clock for 10 minutes and I just want you to go get as many dunks as you can.
Take breaks in between if you need to.
I do want you to be recovered in between reps.
This isn't an endurance workout.
So get up off one foot.
Throw it down.
Walk back.
Recover for 30 seconds to a minute.
Come back in.
Take off off two.
Try to dunk left.
Whatever you want to do, get creative and do it.
Of course, if you can't dunk and all you can do is touch the bottom of the net, I don't care.
I still want you to get creative.
Come in off two and touch the net.
Come from baseline, get up off one and touch the net.
Try to jump off left, touch with the left.
Variability, variety is the key to longevity and it's super important for building kind of well-rounded explosiveness and athleticism.
And so I want you to get creative, set the clock for 10 minutes and just freestyle dunk.
For this exercise, I want to double up the band.
So I'm going around the power rack.
I just don't want one side of the band.
I want both the bands so that I have extra tension.
Or if you have a friend who's holding you back, don't go through like this.
both sides are going to go around you and then your friend would hold you back from there because we want a little extra tension on this one the other key point for the setup is we do need something to hold on to maybe you have a box that i can lean into maybe i have a wall that i can lean into or you could do this in a power rack so i'm going to walk forward
And I'm gonna grab on.
I'm gonna bring my heel just off the floor.
I should be able to slide a piece of paper underneath that heel.
And then I just come to full hip extension.
I'm bringing this leg close to parallel, but not quite to parallel.
Top of the calf touching the hamstring.
and i'm just holding in this position it's a maximal squeeze in this right glute now the whole concept here is we can't work a muscle and we can't get power out of that muscle unless i can feel that muscle and so this teaches you how to really feel that glute it also strengthens the glute in the most important position because in things like upright sprinting that glute needs to contract its hardest near and at hip extension so i'm here
full hip extension get up squeeze that glute as hard as i possibly can make sure that we do have the toe pointed straight forward and i'm just paused in this position squeezing that glute as hard as i can if you do it the right way you'll feel a huge burn in the glute you might almost feel like it's going to cramp up because you're not used to getting a hundred percent maximal contraction that's completely okay
So for my single leg box step down, I'm gonna go on a box around knee height.
Basically, I'm going to hold a light dumbbell.
So I can go 15s in each hand at the most.
So what I want you to do with the dumbbells is as we go down, I want you to kick it forward.
So if you keep them down by your hip, you're not gonna have the right counterbalance and you're gonna fall backwards.
So as you're going down, the dumbbells go higher and higher and higher.
And then once that foot taps and we're on the way up, it's the opposite.
we come up with the lower body and we go down with the weight.
So you're using it as a counterbalance.
So I want you to go on the edge of that box, make sure that box is heavy enough so you're not tipping over.
If you need to, put some dumbbells on the side of that box to counterbalance.
So I'm just going to drop down normal squat mechanics.
I got a break from the hip first.
So it's a hip hinge and then I go down with the knee.
I do not want your knee going too far over your toe on this drill.
So it's going to be here.
Tap that heel and explode up.
I do not want you to push off the ground.
I just want you to tap that heel.
and explode.
It's gonna be two to three seconds down and then as fast as we can on the way up.
So you could start maybe five, tens, or 15 pounders.
If you do wanna load heavier, let's go with that vest.
If it's taking you over a second to get up, then you're loaded too much because I wanna see you get up fast so that it translates to our high speed strength.
For our 7-Eleven breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
okay so i'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill all right so it's in through the nose and i want to make sure that my stomach is rising okay your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they were in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breaths.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we want to do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's OK.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you wanna reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
And I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor, and I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down
to the elbows, and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side, same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee.
So we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius.
That's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for phase two, day two and day four.
So if we're already mobile and flexible, we can take out all of these mobility drills and skip straight to the core.
Do not skip anything on the core or anything on the feet or the ankles.
It's absolutely essential that we build up our feet, our ankles, and our core in this phase.
It's going to help you out long term.
And if you have the time and the energy, we can always do this day again on Saturday.
So if you have the time and energy, do Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one is going to be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping, we gotta really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
okay so for our lateral line stretch we want to get in a power rack or have something to hold on to you can even use like a trx or you can do this without anything to hold on to i'll show you that regression so basically what we're doing is i'm going to step in here if i'm holding on with my left hand at about belly button height then i'm going to take my left foot
over the right foot.
Now I'm going to take my right hand over the head and I'm going to grab onto that power rack.
Already I feel a little bit of a stretch through that lateral line.
So it's through the outside of this leg and then all the way up through that lat.
So I'm going to push away with my left hand and I'm going to pull with my right hand.
So it's push, pull
into that stretch, I'm gonna feel it big time through that lateral aspect of the hip, through that oblique area, and then into the lats.
This stretch is so important for athleticism because our fascial system is connected all the way from the feet,
all the way up through the shoulder everything is connected and so when we do stretches in isolation it doesn't truly work so we have to stretch the whole body as a system to really get good mobility gains and really build that good fascial health so then remember on the other side it would be right over left push away with the right hand
pull with the left hand and I'm only going to hold for a couple seconds and then I'm going to come back to neutral and then grab with the left hand one two and come back to neutral so we're making it dynamic this isn't just a static stretch now if you don't have anything to hold on to you can also do this without the rack it's not going to be as good but we can still cross over right over left and then just pretend like we're here
and shift as far as I can.
I'm thinking about pushing my hip out this way and getting my left hand as far over my head as I can and then coming back.
If you don't have the ankle mobility to keep your heels down and sit in that bottom position, then I want you to grab the weight
and I want you to come into a deep squat without the heels on the ground.
So I would just come forward, my knees are over the toes, and now from here, elbows are resting on the knees, and I'm just trying to sit the heels down as low as I can.
If you can get the heels down, great.
Then we're going to just rock side to side, trying to drive that knee right over the middle of my foot.
and we're just gonna rock there now if you can't get your heels down just get as far as you can all right so i'm pushing my heels as close as i can but they are off the ground now from here i'm just gonna rock side to side all right and we're still gonna get ankle mobility even though the heels aren't on the ground and week after week we can start to get the heels closer and closer until we're able to really sit with a flat foot and rock side to side and get that good ankle mobility
So for our hamstring floss, we're just going to go lying on our back.
I want to make sure that my left leg stays down, so I'm actively pushing this left knee through the ground, pushing my left heel down through the ground, and I'm just going to pull back.
So here in this position, I'm going to feel a little bit of a stretch in my glute, a little bit of a stretch in that opposite hip flexor, and then I'm just
Extending that knee and coming back into flexion.
So it's extension, flexion.
So we call this hamstring flop.
We're gradually trying to get that range of motion bigger and bigger.
In each rep, we're trying to extend that knee more and more.
So for the supine kickover, supine means facing up.
So we're laying on our back and I'm just gonna kick over this way.
So I'm basically swinging my leg across.
I am trying to keep that knee as straight as I can and I'm just gonna tap that toe as high as I can, okay?
And then I'm gonna bring it back the other way and I'm gonna tap my toe on this side as high as I can.
Okay, so it's over the body and then open it up.
And we're just getting a gradual swing.
Each rep, try to loosen up more and more and really swing that foot as high as we can.
I'm going to feel a big stretch on the outside of the hips and I'm going to feel a big stretch on the inside of the legs when I'm opening up to that side.
For the 90-90 hip opener, I'm just going to start in a 90-90 position.
So that means I'm sitting here, I'm going to roll over towards my left glute, and I'm going to get in a 90-degree position with that knee, and then this back leg is also going to be 90 degrees.
So we have 90 here, we have 90 here, and we have 90 here.
Okay, from there, I'm gonna square my chest with this knee.
So I'm nice and tall right here.
Now from there, my left hand is back.
I'm gonna thread my right arm underneath, and the ultimate goal is to get the right shoulder down to the floor.
A lot of you might not have that mobility yet, but just get as low as we can comfortably.
So I'm gonna thread through.
One, two, and then I'm gonna roll to the next side.
So hand down.
I get into this position, same thing, 90, 90, 90, and then I thread my left hand through, shoulder to the ground.
I should feel that stretch sort of in the outside of the hip, and we're just going to flow straight through.
Okay, so after the desired reps there, then I'm going back to my original position, 90-90.
I'm gonna have both hands on the floor.
I'm gonna keep this leg grounded.
I cannot lift this knee or this ankle off the ground, and I'm just gonna raise as high as I can and back down.
So now it's just an opener.
A lot of you will go here, and the tendency is to open up here.
We gotta stay grounded.
My goal is to get the sole of that foot flat on the floor.
So I wanna get all the way flat if possible and back down.
After the desired reps, I'm flowing straight through.
Same thing, I'm down and open.
We should feel that stretch on the opener in here.
So inside of the leg that's grounded, inside of the leg that's moving as well.
Really opening up those hips.
For the hip flexor tilt, I'm just gonna use a box of bench or a chair.
I'm gonna get my back foot up so the top of my foot is on the bench.
I'm not gonna go with my toe on the bench.
Top of the foot on the bench, I'm just gonna come down.
Now I wanna get my heel touching my hips or as close as I can get to that.
If you have a pad, that'd be better.
I wouldn't do this on hardwood.
Make sure you got a nice soft surface.
So I'm touching.
I'm in a straight line from my knee all the way up through my shoulders.
And I'm just going to sit here.
First, I'm going to get in a good position.
This ankle should be under that knee.
I should already feel a little bit of a stretch in that hip flexor, a little bit in the quad as well.
Now from here, I'm getting nice and wide.
I'm not going to lean forward.
And I'm going arms out.
and together now at the top with straight elbows not bent elbows at the top i'm going to lean towards the lead leg so that's to my right as far as i can hold for five
then come right back okay and then we're hands down all the way up hands together nice and tall elongate through the spine and lean towards that lead leg three two one back down and we're back through
For the kneeling adductor pulse, I'm gonna go half kneel position.
I'm going to point the toe out so I'm not curled.
I'm pointed like this.
Top of the foot is down towards the floor.
I'm gonna go straight out with this leg.
This knee's gonna be nice and straight.
Okay, from here, I'm gonna do some rocks.
So I'm gonna rock straight back.
I need my hips to touch my heels or as close as you can.
And you're gonna really feel that stretch in the adductor and you'll feel a certain angle in that adductor.
And now we're gonna switch that angle by rocking forward.
So I'm gonna rock back one second and then I'm gonna creep the hands forward.
nice and far until I get close to full hip extension and then creep it back so when I go forward I get a different angle of those adductors and then when I go back I get the complete opposite side of the muscle so I'm back and I'm forward as far as I can all right make sure in this position
where I'm rocking forward, I'm getting to that full hip extension.
So some people stay tucked right there or some people go too far where they're in hip hyperextension.
I just need to get all the way out until I'm in a straight line from that knee all the way up through that shoulder.
So for our standing hip CARS, CARS stands for Controlled Articular Rotation.
So this is a FRC concept, Functional Range Conditioning.
So this is getting us nice and mobile, but building stability at these short and long muscle lengths, which prevents injuries, helps us get more explosive.
So it's a little bit different in your normal type of stretching.
Rule number one, we've got to create tension through the body, tension through the upper body.
So I need you to squeeze the fist and keep a tight core in this whole drill.
From here, I'm just going to lift up as high as I can with that right knee.
And then from there, instead of a normal hip circle where we're down like that, I'm going to turn the foot outwards.
So I'm going to turn the foot out, and then I'm going to kick it around
and bring it down, and then I'm gonna reverse that.
So now I'm gonna kick back as far as I can, and then I'm bringing it all the way back around.
So I like to pretend like there's a really high fence right here, and I gotta step over that imaginary fence.
and then bring it down some of you balance is going to be an issue here it's okay if you want to hold on to something hold on to two poles or hold on to a power rack whatever you got to do all that matters here is that we're getting the full range of motion through that hip joint so i don't want to leave any range of motion left in the tank i want you to really get every single range of motion so that we can build that stability at those ranges and really free up your hips for more movement
my overhead deep squat progression so I'm just gonna start nice and high my feet are a little wider than shoulder width apart and I'm just gonna come into a hamstring stretch okay back nice and flat I get as low as I can hold one two three from here I get my hands to the ground and I'm trying to come into a deep squat I'm gonna hold in this position for three seconds I'm gonna lean forward okay push my knees out with my elbows hold one three
two, three, rock back, get my heels down to the ground, three seconds here, and then raise one overhead, raise two overhead, and stand.
Okay, so that's one rep, we have three reps, so now I'm cycling straight back into it.
Okay, so it's three seconds there.
Deep squat, three seconds.
Lean forward, three seconds.
Rock it back, three seconds.
One up, two up, stand.
If you can't get in that deep squat position, it's okay.
Let's just try to get as low as we possibly can and gradually get better every time we do this warmup.
So for our stability ball, stir the pot, I'm going to go in a normal plank position on the stability ball.
If you're a beginner and that is too hard already, then just hold in that position and forget the exercise.
Just hold for 30 seconds.
But assuming that you're intermediate or advanced, we'll go on to the next progression.
So I need the elbows directly underneath the shoulder.
I'm coming into that flat position.
To make it easier, we go feet wider.
To make it harder, we go feet more narrow.
Now from here, I'm staying flat all the way through, and I'm just going to make circles, big controlled circles.
That way, once I finish the desired reps, I get to the other side.
Once I finish there, I go straight front back.
All right, so it's stir the pot this way, stir the pot the other way, and then a rocker forwards, backwards.
We're going to light up that front core.
We're going to get a ton of the intrinsic core muscles fired up to stabilize that spine as we're moving on the ball.
So for my ball of the foot, one leg turns, I'm going to come to the ball of my foot.
I cannot have my heel down on the ground.
So we're decreasing that surface area, increasing the stability needs.
So I'm here pointing that big foot down into the ground.
First, just find your balance.
Now, if you find it there, we are coming into an RDL.
Try to get the torso flat to the ground.
And now from here, I'm just doing turns.
All right, as big as I can back to neutral and then to the other side.
Now those turns might be very small like this to start, but as you get better, I want you to do full turns, full rotations up as high as we can.
All right, you're going to feel the feet completely burning from the toes all the way back up through the heels, back up through the calves, lateral aspects of the calves.
The lower leg and the feet are going to be firing the outside muscles and those small intrinsic muscles.
For my stability ball roll up, I can either use a stability ball or I could just use a basketball.
I need this foot, my right foot off the ground about six inches, this leg straight up in the air and point the toe.
If I can have it at 90 degrees, great.
Most of you won't, it'll be a little bit lower.
And you're just going to pin opposite.
So left leg high, right hand.
And now I'm just going to gradually move it up about six inches with each hand until it reaches the toe.
And then I bring it back down until I'm all the way back down to the ground with my head.
All right, so it's here all the way up to the toe and right back down.
Alright, once I finish the desired reps with that left leg, right hand, I switch and I go right leg, left hand.
Alright, we're going to feel a big burn in that front core, anterior abdominal muscles get fired up.
This is a good one to actually get your front core nice and ripped if your body fat is low enough, your abs are going to start to pop out a little bit with this exercise.
So for the arch squats, we're gonna be working on the intrinsic muscles of our feet, extremely important for our athleticism.
So if I were to just put my foot normal, I have a little arch, but it's nothing much.
Right now, I wanna exaggerate that arch in my foot.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna pull my toes up.
Notice, just by pulling my toes up in the air, I already established a pretty good arch.
Now, I have three points of contact.
That's below the ball of my foot, below the pinky toe, and my heel.
So we call that the tripod.
So those are the only things touching the ground.
I already have that good arch.
Now, between the ball of my big toe and my heel, I'm thinking about contracting or shortening it.
So I'm pulling, almost like I'm gripping the ground and I'm building that arch even more.
You'll feel a burn on the top of your foot and the tendons on the top of your foot will start to kind of pop out a little bit, it seems like.
Now, from there, I'm gonna hold that position, which is hard if you don't have that strength.
So I'm doing that with both feet, toes up, squeeze the floor, really shorten, almost like I'm pulling my toes back in towards my foot.
And then I'm just going to squat.
I'm going to get down pretty close to parallel.
And then on the way up, I'm going to push my toes in and reverse it.
Okay, so I got my arch, I'm squatting, I'm gonna push my toe in and reverse it.
So when I'm going to come up, my first movement is toes down, like I'm gripping the floor or curling my toes into the ground as hard as I can, and that's gonna build a connection between the toes and the post chain, especially the toes and the glutes.
Okay, so this is gonna feel kind of awkward at first, but once you get that toe press, you're gonna really start to activate more glutes in the squat.
Okay, so again, toes up, build that arch, scrunch between the ball of the big toe and the heel.
I got that good arch.
I'm gonna squat slow and press the toe, get up, squeeze those glutes at the top, and then I just go again.
push come up toes up squeeze build that arch and go okay so you should feel that burn a little bit in the arch mostly on the top of the foot on the front of the ankle maybe even up into the front of the shins a little bit there's a lot of muscles in that region of the lower leg that pull the arch up
So we wanna build that arch and we wanna strengthen those intrinsic muscles of the feet to really strengthen up and become stable and build that base for explosiveness later on.
So for my prone pull through, I'm just gonna use a dumbbell or if you have like a sandbag or even a medicine ball, you can use that.
I'm gonna use 10 pounds right now.
Don't worry about going too heavy.
This is all about stabilization.
So I'm trying to keep my back as flat as I can as I reach through, whereas most people drop into rotation, all right?
So I'm gonna bring my hands just underneath my shoulders
My knees are underneath my hips, and then I'm just going to push up my knees, and I'm going to stabilize.
My feet are going to be a little bit wider, and the harder we want to make it, we can go more and more narrow.
So I'm going to start out a little wider than shoulder width apart with the feet, and then I'm just going to reach across, pull through, and back down.
And then I reach across the other way, pull through, and back down.
So that's one rep.
So, this may feel easy.
This may feel like it's something where you're not getting a huge burn.
That's completely fine.
It's all about balance and stabilization.
I want you to be able to balance a water bottle on your lower back during this exercise.
So, if your friend sets a water bottle on your back, I want you to be able to get through all the reps without rotating and knocking it over.
So for my mini band ankle turns, I'm going to use a mini band.
Make sure that it's light enough tension to where you can really move it and it's not too much tension.
If it's too much tension, then you're going to try to do it all from the hips.
I want you really just working through the ankles here.
All right.
So I actually like to hold on to a foam roller or a small ball in between my thighs because now if I do it by externally rotating at the hip, this is going to drop.
And so I gotta squeeze onto this and hold this and now it ensures that I'm really working just with the ankles.
So I'm gonna go out around and down to the ground and bring it back.
So it's almost like a half circle or a quarter of a circle.
So I'm pointing toes in and I'm going out down to the ground.
The toes are pointing out and then I come back around.
Alright, so making that little corridor circle, I'm gonna really feel this all the way down the outside of the lower leg and through the lateral, the outside aspect of my ankles.
OK, for the cable drop step rotation, I'm just going to use a cable start light and build up gradually.
Or if you don't have a cable, you could use a band.
I'm going to interlock my fingers over the handle and just step it out just a little bit.
All right.
We're gonna come into a quarter squat position.
Now, to open up that way, I gotta drive off the right foot.
I'm gonna open up and I'm gonna get that left foot down so that that toe is pointing that way, all right?
I don't want you to go into rotation until that foot is down.
So I'm here, I push into position, and then from here I can open up and explode there.
Now on the way back I'm coming halfway, hands right in front of the chest, fire up that core, two to three seconds, and then release back to the start.
So it's foot down, explode, come back, hold, and release.
So the reason that I want you to not just go into rotation but get the foot down first is we're then gonna work that kind of recoil core, we're gonna work as the full fascia system instead of just muscular power.
So we're getting here, and then we get a good recoil through the core, and we get here, and then coming back, we get that pause,
and then release.
Do the desired reps to one side and then go back and do the desired reps to the other side.
We should feel a burn through the core especially the side in the obliques.
All right, so for my big toe extension, I'm just going to use a box, but you could use a wall or anything flat and stable.
Basically, I'm just going to try to keep the sole of my foot on the ground, and I'm going to try to get my big toe straight up onto that box.
So I'm not going to quite get it.
If you have a true 90 degree range of motion, you're going to be able to get it.
Most people don't quite have that, but I want to get as close as I can.
And I'm just gonna hold in that position.
If you wanna rock a little bit, it should be slight discomfort.
It shouldn't be so uncomfortable that you're like screaming or really in pain.
Otherwise, we're putting on too much of a stretch.
But I can rock forward just a little bit.
And I feel that stretch through the bottom of the foot all the way through that big toe.
Big toe extension is so important, especially for us as basketball players because we're wearing these stiff-soled shoes.
And so we lose a lot of that range of motion.
And so if I'm going to sprint and my feet lock up here or my toe doesn't have that extension, locks up there, I can't get to full hip extension.
I have to be able to get close to that 70, 80 degree range of motion to actually get full hip extension and the glutes are the most powerful muscle in the body.
And so just by limiting my big toe extension, I may not be getting 100% of that contraction
through the glutes so just to walk without problems you need 30 degrees of range of motion but to really sprint we want to get closer to that 70 80 and on this drill since we have a little assistance and it's passive we want to get maybe closer to 90. like i said i can't quite get there most of you probably won't but we want to get close to that 90 degrees
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day one and day five of phase two.
So if we have to, we can skip the foam roller circuit if we're really pressed for time.
Do the dynamic warmup.
Knee over toe split squat, we could skip this.
if we're pressed for time or if you have any type of knee pain or you're prone to patellar tendonitis, we can skip this exercise.
Always do the reverse plank alternating hold.
It's very important for getting some strength through the post chain, through the hamstrings, through the glutes.
Ring or cone change of direction, always do this.
At least get through two sets here.
Very essential for setting up optimal change of direction long term.
We can skip this line series, so the line agility series, the next three exercises.
If we're pressed for time, skip those.
I really recommend doing them, but if you're pressed for time or you're already beating yourself up on the court with a ton of skills training, skip that.
We have to do our overcoming isometric rack pull.
So essential for getting maximal muscle activation.
One of the highest force outputs that we can possibly get from any exercise, we get from this overcoming isometric rack pull.
So do not skip that.
Do not skip the assisted jumps.
Absolutely necessary for revving up that nervous system, activating fast switch muscle fibers faster than we're used to with regular jumping.
Deadlift RDL eccentric combo.
Definitely want to get this, very essential for building up our ability to absorb forces, and then we're also building up our ability to explode concentrically.
RFESS oscillating split squat, definitely do this exercise.
If you're really pressed for time, take it down to two sets, but this exercise is absolutely essential for this phase.
Achilles spring combo, we definitely want to do this exercise.
7-11 breathing, we
Always want to do the 7-Eleven breathing to get us back into that parasympathetic nervous system.
Kickstart our recovery and static stretching.
If you're already flexible and mobile, skip it.
If you're extremely tight, then you do want to keep that static stretch in there.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
so you could either go this way or you could go vertical so if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute now always if we want more pressure we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use golf ball, baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
And I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're going to go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch i'm just going to go over with the left leg i'm going to come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm going to go five cycles, and then I'm going to switch to the other side.
Five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral, and I'm going down.
I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom.
pop out I need five of these down and back so it's ten total and then I immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now I land I turn this foot forward I pivot I'm here knee a couple inches off the floor I'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're gonna go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
one, two, three, lean, one, two, three, heels back down, one, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze.
And then relax.
This is all for hip activation.
Getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we've got to get them revved up for our session.
For the reverse plank alternating hold, I'm gonna get a box and a bench or two boxes or two benches.
Just make sure that they're the same height.
Okay, so I'm just gonna come on my shoulder blades.
So my shoulders are elevated.
I'm gonna bring my feet up and I'm gonna keep this slight bend in the knees.
So I don't want you completely locked out.
So slight bend in the knees, toes pointed straight up.
and now from here, I'm just gonna hold on one leg for two seconds, and then I'm gonna come down and switch, hold on the other leg for two seconds.
So right now, I'm firing up my hamstrings, I feel a little bit in my glute, you might feel a tiny bit in your low back, but the big burn is gonna be in the hamstring.
Now from here, to progress that, if you're advanced, you can start to switch fast,
and rapidly and think about putting as much force as you can down into the box on every switch all right we're still going to go with that two second hold so we can get some good isometric strength in the hamstrings which is really going to help with our sprint speed because it's a angle specific just like when uh when we when our feet hit the ground we have that minimal knee bend it's the same knee bend that we have here so we're getting strength
at the specific angles that's gonna translate to sprinting.
And isometric strength, especially in the hamstrings, is huge for injury prevention, okay?
So make sure that you start slow, not rapid with the switches.
If you feel good and you're ready to go, then start to go fast with the switches, still with the two second hold.
Okay, so ring or cone change of direction level two, very similar to what we do in level one.
Remember level one is here, push out stick.
Now instead of that stick, I'm gonna absorb and redirect immediately and get back into that one.
So if I have a partner that's on the clap, boom.
Boom, stabilize.
It's all about how quick we can get in and out of the ring.
I don't wanna spend time here.
I don't wanna spend time here.
I gotta treat the floor like it's a springboard.
I'm springing off, springing off, and then stabilize one, two, and come back.
finish the desired reps to one side, and then we switch over to that other side.
Same thing with the cones.
It's here, push out here, get back here.
I do want to use these cones because I want to work on proprioception, kinesthetic awareness of just knowing where my feet are in space.
So we shouldn't be coming back and knocking over these cones.
I should be able to get my foot right there in the center, just where it started.
If you're in a position where you get to work out on turf or something that's nice on your feet, go ahead and do these barefoot because it is good to get that sensory input from your skin of just knowing where your body positions are.
If you can't, if you're in a big public gym and it's kind of gross to do that, that's okay, just wear shoes.
I wouldn't do this in socks though because a lot of people will slip since you're producing high forces.
So either go barefoot or if you have to, go shoes.
That's completely fine.
On the line acceleration deceleration drill, we just need a line that's about 15 feet in length.
If I'm going to my right, my left leg is gonna be my stride leg.
My right foot is gonna stay on the line every single time.
So I'm just gonna lift this right foot a little bit,
stride with that left leg and decelerate pushback as quick as I possibly can.
So I move over about six inches every time and then I stride that left foot back and I go into my acceleration.
So it's decel, acceleration, deceleration, acceleration.
Okay, we're going all the way through.
Boom, once we reach that line, now we're going left, and my right foot is the stride leg.
Okay, so left foot lift up, right leg stride decelerate, and accelerate, decelerate, accelerate.
All right.
Really treat it like you're going somewhere so that you have some force to absorb and to push back.
Don't just go through it like this.
I want you to really lean like you're taking off in your sprint and then catch yourself and push yourself back.
You gotta think of this ground as a springboard, okay?
I don't want you to land and sink into your joints.
I want you to land and push straight back.
So we gotta have that functional stiffness.
So as soon as you land, push straight back, okay?
On this drill, we're really focusing on improving that deceleration time and also getting that explosive acceleration from that back push.
So we go down, we go back.
That counts as one rep.
On the line V cut drill, we just need a line, any line that's about 15 feet in length.
All I'm gonna do is get on that line and I'm making a V. So I'm pushing up, I'm getting back to that same spot, and then I'm pushing backwards, right?
So I made that V.
hit up hit back and then i push forward about a foot with each step so now i'm pushing up boom boom back push up to that next spot okay push up to that next spot so this one we're going for quickness we are not going for distance okay so we're going to stay pretty close to this line and get nice and quick with it okay notice the angle of my foot when i'm going back i'm pointed out
so i don't want your toe pointing straight forward i want you to touch get up touch and then angle that toe out about 45 degrees load and drive up to that next spot okay we're going all 15 feet turn around bring it back on the other side this drill is great for improving our change of direction ability and our overall quickness
the line rotational agility we need a line that's 15 feet in length all we're going to do is we're going to jab i'm going to come back out on both feet and i'm going to go with a half spin so i'm going to rotate towards the wall right now half spin get my right foot on half spin come back to neutral i move up a little bit each time okay so very slow here it's left foot jab both feet out rotation right foot jab
both feet out, and we're back in.
Every single time, my foot is hitting that line because I need to really know where my feet are in space.
Once we get that pattern, we got to start to really speed it up.
So once I get down to the end, I'm going to switch over.
So now my right foot is that initial jab.
and my left foot is the jab after the half spin, okay?
Jab, half spin, jab, half spin.
It's a very similar movement to your half spin in a game if you were to go one way, bring that foot through, pause, and go.
It's that same exact movement, and we're just gonna groove that pattern right now.
So for our overcoming isometric hold, basically I'm going to go in a rack.
Now I want to make sure it is bolted down or it has a lot of weights on it so that I'm not going to lift it off the ground.
Alright, I'm going to set the pins so that they're about mid-thigh and I'm just going to step in with a regular barbell or you can even do this with a trap bar.
I'm going to go, if I'm using a regular barbell, I'm going alternating grip.
So I'm going right hand over, left hand under, hands are just outside my hips.
No weight on the barbell, and I'm just going to get that bar right up against the pins, and this barbell should be about mid-thigh.
So I don't want it too high on the hip.
I don't want it down on the knee.
I want it mid-thigh.
And now from here, I'm just pulling as hard as I can, like I'm trying to lift this rack.
And I'm going to hold for the desired rep.
So for the first phase, that's eight seconds.
All right.
So I'm just going to go...
hard as I can for eight seconds.
I'm pushing my feet into the ground.
I'm thinking about applying as much force into the ground as I can, or I'm thinking about trying to lift this rack off the floor.
All right.
So we're working against an immovable object.
So that's what we call an overcoming isometric.
best way to do this is the power rack now if you don't have a power rack or you don't have the pins or the power rack isn't bolted down or heavy enough and you think it's going to lift off we can go back to what we did in phase one with the isometric rear foot elevated split squat
but just use a weight that you wouldn't be able to actually do reps with, a weight heavy enough to where you can only hold it in that mid-thigh position.
I would be using a weight that I really can't do reps with because it's too heavy, and I would throw my back foot up, and then I would come into that position with that slight knee bend, sort of like I'm taking off in a single leg jump, that same knee angle, and I'm just holding in this position.
Now again, we're gonna go eight seconds, and then switch,
But if it was too easy, then you can extend the rep time.
So you can extend it until you come close to failure, close to that point where you can no longer hold and then switch.
If you are getting over eight seconds and it's too easy, then keep going up.
And the other option, if you are experienced with the leg press and you've been doing leg press for a long time and you don't have the power rack, you could load up the leg press with a weight that you can't actually lift, a weight that's too heavy to lift off the pins.
and just keep the pins locked and just push against it as hard as you can.
So that's another way to get an overcoming isometric.
So the benefit of the overcoming isometric is we're building functional stiffness, which is very important for vertical jump, for speed, for everything athletically that we're doing in sports.
we're really learning how to get that neural drive and send signals to the muscle fibers and activate those big strong fast twitch muscle fibers studies have shown that this is one of the best ways to activate more total muscle fibers so then when we go into our plyometrics we have more to work with and we're able to get more and more explosive
So for the assisted jump, there's a lot of different ways to do this.
The way that I like to do it is I just like to use a power rack and I just loop a band through there.
So I loop it through, make sure that we're nice and stable there, and then I just step back a little bit.
Now, you've got to be safe with this.
I don't want you using a band that has so much tension that when you jump, you're being pulled forward because you could easily hit your head on the rack.
I want you to use a band where you can come down
with your hands right about chin level, step back a little bit, and then you're able to just jump straight up and down without getting pulled in towards a rack, all right?
Some people, if you're at like a LA Fitness where they have a hoop attached to the wall, you could always loop a band around the pole that attaches the hoop to the wall.
and you can just go right underneath and explode.
There's a lot of different ways to do it.
The key to assisted jumps, it's an overspeed exercise.
So I'm teaching my nervous system to activate muscle fibers faster.
But if there's no force involved because the band has too much tension and it's doing all the work to pull me up, then this isn't beneficial at all.
And so I recommend the 10 to 20% range.
I'm increasing my vertical by 10 to 20%.
So if I have a standing 30 inch vertical, and let's just say I was measuring on like a just jump mat or some sort of device like an app.
If I jump with this, I don't want to be all of a sudden at 40 inches.
I want to be anywhere from 33 to maybe 36 or 37 inches.
Now, I don't need you to test, but you can kind of just eyeball it and just feel like, hey, maybe I'm getting an extra five inches on this.
That means that you still have to apply force, but because you've deloaded your body weight a little bit with the band, then you're able to apply that force faster.
Now, because a major goal of this phase
eccentric and transitioning out of the bottom I do want you to think about attacking the floor so I need you to drop as fast as we can I don't want you to slowly lower or let gravity take you down I want you to think about starting high and attack the floor get up and then reset attack the floor get up reset okay and again we do not want to get pulled forward every rep on these I want to be able to step back and go straight up straight down without this band
pulling me too far in.
All right, for our dumbbell one-step jump, hold two light dumbbells in the hands.
I'm going with 15 pounders right now.
I wouldn't start any heavier than that, otherwise we're gonna lose explosiveness.
All right, so for this drill, we're gonna have the dumbbells in the hands, and I want you to replicate that last step.
So think about how you'd be jumping, pretend like you have a basketball,
how you would jump right you would stride with that penultimate you would lower the hips you would still have this pretty straight knee in this base position and then as we bring this foot up we would pop off the ball of the foot we would have our little turn stance and we would explode i want you to do that same thing just with dumbbells
So I'm starting in a big stride.
If you want to make it more specific, you can even lift up the toe a little bit.
That kind of helps load the calf and the hamstrings.
So from this position, I'm just rocking forward, boom, get that foot down, explode as high as I can, right?
So it's here, lift that toe, step in, explode, stick that landing, and then just step it back.
So of course we're going to do the recommended reps to one side and then we're going to switch and do the recommended reps to the other side.
So for the one tube depth drop, I'm going to need two boxes or right now I'm using a bench to drop off and a box to jump on.
Make sure both of them are nice and stable.
For the bench or the box that you're dropping off, you're going to be pushing forward a little bit.
So it's got to be either a very stable bench
or you need to put weights on it behind it so that you're not slipping out when you push forward.
So I want to use a box or a bench that is below my knee height.
I don't want it to be all the way up to my thigh.
I want it to be at or below knee height to start.
Instead of a normal depth drop where we're here and we land with the feet at the same time, I want you to land one, two.
So you're landing right, left in this diagonal position, this turn stance, and then we're going to take off.
and I want you to use the energy from that drop to turn it into vertical power.
So think about our normal one-two turn stance takeoff dunk.
It's that same motion except now we have more of a counter movement because we're dropping from the box.
So don't jump off.
Dangle one foot and then kind of push forward a little bit and it's going to be right left.
As soon as the left foot hits, I got to pop off the ground.
So it's right left.
get up as high as we can.
All right.
So basically we're taking a traditional depth jump and we're turning it into a more sport specific depth jump with that one to pop off the ground.
So this drill is a great way to start to build that eccentric power and more importantly, that ability to transition from that counter movement and get up into that concentric action, which allows us to explode off the ground.
So you got to play around with the distance of the box.
I generally go about six feet apart.
You got to kind of feel it out.
Some people with longer legs might need a little bit more.
I don't want you to set up so far that you have to really push off that first box.
i want you to really barely push off or barely push forward off that uh off the first box we're mostly just using that box so that we can get that vertical drop and build up more eccentric load and then transition that out of the ground turn it into concentric power and explode as high as we can
And you've got to remember that the box height does not matter that much.
We don't want to go as high as possible because you're going to be getting up and you're going to be barely landing on that box.
If we're landing in that low position, we're getting a lot of stress to the patellar tendon.
So I want you landing in a normal quarter squat position.
So as high as that box can go with you landing in a normal quarter squat position, great.
But as soon as you start getting on that box and landing down here, we know that that box height is too high.
You can't actually jump that high.
You're just lifting your legs up to get on.
On this exercise, we have three options.
Our best option is going with a Smith machine.
When it's all about producing force in these jump-specific angles, this is a great option because then we don't have the instability, right?
We have extra stability, so now we can actually produce
maximal force if i'm using the smith machine i'm going rear foot elevated options so i can go back on my bench i want to set up with my heel underneath the bar so if i draw a straight line down it's intersecting that heel that's going to allow me to get the knee right above the toe in my bottom position so i'm coming in i can lift
heel right underneath that bar, and then I'm going back foot up, and I'm just coming down to my 90 degree angle.
So I'm coming down right about there, and then I'm back up, alright?
About one second down, half a second up.
Again, our bottom position is our 90 degree angle.
We are not going thighs parallel.
Right now, what we're most concerned with is building that ability to produce high force at jump specific joint angles.
Now, as always with the weight, we want to start light and then we want to gradually go up.
For a lot of our NBA players, I like to see them get to one times body weight at the minimum.
So if they're 200 pounds, I want to see 200 pounds on this Smith machine cranking out for at least three to five reps.
So that's a pretty good standard, but we can get much stronger.
The beautiful thing about this is we truly overload the legs, overloading the quads and the glutes, but we're not overloading the spine because it's half the load that we would normally use
in a back squat now of course you got to be pretty advanced for stuff like this if you're new to weight training you're probably not going to want to load up on this exercise and you should probably still be doing basic things like goblet squats but as long as you're advanced and you've been lifting a while then we can start light and gradually load up as always we should really feel quad and glute working but we're not feeling any pain in the knee in the low back in any joints or any tendons now if you don't have the smith machine
we're going to use a barbell but I don't like barbell rear foot elevated because I don't like the danger of having a heavy weight and then balancing on one leg so I'm gonna come in pretend like I actually have some weight on this bar and I'm gonna do a half reverse lunge so I'm putting this foot back alright that's for my added stability and I'm just coming down to a 90 degree angle and then I'm stepping right back up alright so I'm here
to here so it's almost like a full reverse lunge but again we're working on jump specific joint angles so I'm only coming to that position look at where I end up that knee is right above the toe I'm not beyond the toe I'm right above the toe okay you should be able to film yourself from the side and see that you're getting to around a 90 degree angle with the knee
right above the toe now this exercise you really got to start light and feel it out once your form is perfect then we start to load up and then our final option if you're not comfortable with the barbell option or the smith machine option hold dumbbells start light gradually go up eventually we want to get pretty heavy and on this one i could either do my half reverse lunge or i can do my rear foot elevated so i can put that back foot up and go down to my 90 degree angle
For this exercise, I got my two bands tied together.
I got it around a nice stable pull or have a friend hold it.
And I want it set up so that it's pulling between knee and hip height.
Now you have to pay attention to the band setup.
So I'm going around the right shoulder and then I'm going to wind up.
So if I'm around my right shoulder, I'm turning towards my left shoulder.
all the way until my chest is square over here.
So now I have it pulling rotationally.
Now from here, I'm going to set up in a split stance and make sure you do have some good tension on this band.
Of course, your first couple sets will go light tension.
Eventually we can start to walk it out and get a little bit heavier tension.
But I'm setting up in this split stance right here and I want to bring my left shoulder towards my right knee so I'm
here so this is my base position and what you're going to notice is we're really loading that hip this is one of my favorite ways to teach people how to get more hip activation and glute activation and load through the hip with that first step explosiveness all right so we're not relying on those quads to push us forward after this drill you're going to learn how to really get into the glute and so i need you to bring that left shoulder down
you're gonna feel a stretch on that lateral aspect of the right hip.
All right, so I'm really getting into that hip and then I just drive out of it.
So I just push here.
Notice that I'm going kind of diagonal, so it's not a direct lateral and it's not linear.
Think about it like if you had a basketball and somebody was guarding you, the angle that I'm driving by that defender with.
So again, this is my base position.
I get into my split stance.
Once I'm nice and balanced, it's left shoulder here.
Get into that hip, load.
push out now you'll notice on this foot my toe is gonna point in and my heel is gonna point away slightly I don't want you to think about this consciously to where you're really hitting a hard pivot you should do this naturally where we step into it and the toe is pointed in the direction that I'm going and the heel is pointed away some of you guys naturally will come here and we don't want this to move forward alright so I'm loaded up load that glute and
explode, drive out.
I need that weight shift.
I start with all my load on this leg and then when I'm here, all of my load is on this leg and this foot is unloaded.
So for the Achilles spring combo, we're turning your Achilles into a energy storing monster, all right?
So it's a combination exercise.
What we're gonna do is a basic short hop on one leg, okay?
So I'm going on one leg, ball of the foot.
If you're in a place where you can do this barefoot, do it.
If not, it's okay, use a shoe.
So, heel off the ground, and I'm just hopping.
Couple inches off the ground, think about maybe 50 to 70% of your max jump height, because I don't want you getting low and using muscles.
I want you relying on that Achilles just to store and release that elastic energy.
Now, look in the notes section, it's gonna have the rep time, okay?
So let's say it was 30 seconds, all right?
I get done, I switch over.
30 seconds on the other side.
As soon as I'm done there, I go back to the first leg with the calf raise.
So I'm going right leg on the hop.
I'm going left leg on the hop.
And then I step straight in.
I got a step set up.
You could use a heavy weight that's not going to tip or a step.
Make sure you have something to hold on to.
And then we're going to hold the weight as heavy as we can.
Obviously we start body weight and we gradually go up.
But I'm going opposite.
So if I'm doing the eccentric calf raise on the right foot, I want to hold it in the left hand.
I want to hold on to the power rack or whatever you're holding on to with the right hand.
I have two legs on.
Okay, ball of the foot.
So half my foot is hanging off.
and I'm gonna go concentrically, so on the way up I go up on two, and then I come to one, and I go down for three seconds as low as I can, and then I put the other foot down.
So it's up on two, as high as we can, down on one, sustain it for three seconds.
Okay, so we're building that eccentric strength in the calf and a lot of stiffness through that Achilles tendon.
And that goes a long way when it comes to sprinting and jumping.
We want maximal stiffness so that it really stores and releases elastic energy.
Now, the reason that I call this the Achilles spring combo is because through the eccentric work, we're getting the perfect amount of stiffness through the Achilles, which is very, very important for jumping and sprinting and all athletic movements.
And then with the short hop, we're doing a lot of things, but one thing is we're improving the hysteresis.
So that is how much can we store and utilize without letting it leak out in the form of heat.
So remember, this is a combo exercise.
After the hop, we go directly into the eccentric calf raise.
Always look in the notes section because on this, the rep range might change week to week or it might stay the same.
So always look at the notes section so that you can stay updated on where you're at in that rep range.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you wanna reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
And I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
And I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for phase three, day three.
Already a very short workout.
If you have to cut back, cut out the foam roller circuit, do the dynamic warm-up, cut out the box drop crossover step.
Love this exercise, but if you're in a rush, take that out.
You could take out the non-counter movement one leg pistol jump.
Always do the versatile jump drill.
We need this for building skill in our jump.
10-minute freestyle dunk session, always have to have it.
If you can't get to a court, just do it in your living room.
Do it wherever you can.
Literally just run as far as you can and jump high, whether that is a full three-point line run or that's just you in your living room taking four steps and jumping as high as you can.
Whatever you can get, let's do it.
Dratch RFESS, definitely do this.
We gotta build that concentric power.
We're getting the tendons and the muscles involved.
Never skip that exercise.
And then if you wanna skip the static stretch, I'm fine with that as long as you're already flexible.
Let's do it.
So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we can cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're gonna do is the calves.
So we're just gonna cross over and I'm gonna push myself up so my hips are off the ground and I'm just gonna roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over, we're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm gonna go on the side of the roller now and I'm just gonna come down into a plank position and I'm gonna roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's going to be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping, we gotta really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam low circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
all right i'm staying stiff with the feet so i'm not letting my heel collapse i want to stay on the ball of the foot and i'm just going to go about 50 of my max speed i'm not going too fast yet we're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips for the seal jacks it's basically like a jumping jack except i'm going to coordinate arms with the legs so i'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time back to neutral
over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here, maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed.
So we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go over with the left leg.
I'm gonna come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't wanna go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom.
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two, three.
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
Alright.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here.
And then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back.
hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my mid-foot right now, and now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult, but if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction, and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers.
and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for my box drop crossover step, I'm going to use a box.
This box is about knee height.
I wouldn't want to go too much higher than that to start.
And I'm going to start on the box.
I'm going to drop off.
So I'm not jumping off, I'm dropping off.
My feet are going to land at the same time.
So it's dangle one off, drop.
feet hit at the same time now as soon as my feet hit I got to use that energy from the floor from that stretch shortening cycle and push out laterally into that crossover step so my left foot stays anchored I cross over that right foot and then I plant and with this left foot this outside foot I got to push off as hard as I can and
use the floor like a springboard straight into my crossover step.
So now my right foot is the anchor foot, my left foot becomes the stride foot.
The reason I'm using this hurdle is accountability for my stride length.
So if we can get this up
pretty high say four maybe three or four feet away from that first hurdle now in this position I got to work on striding and getting that knee nice and high so we want to work on explosiveness but we also want to work on stride length now
You know you got this too far when you feel like you have to reach to get over.
We never want to reach because one, it's slow, and two, that leads to hamstring injuries.
Hamstring strains come from people reaching, all right?
I need you to get stride length but still strike that foot right in front of the center of gravity or right underneath the center of gravity.
I don't want you to be striking the foot out here and then having to pull your body forward.
So work on that stride length, but also pay attention to how you feel when that foot is landing.
You should feel more explosive on that next step and not less explosive like you're having to pull your center of gravity over that foot.
If you don't have the box, of course, we can always just jump.
So we can jump and then on landing we go from there.
We're going to get the same effect, same stretch reflex.
So for our versatile jump drill, basically what we're going to do is introduce three different directions on the jump.
So it's going to be a penultimate step into our max jump.
I want you to work on the turn.
So of course, penultimate, take that long stride, get that turn, take off as high as we can.
Now, as soon as you land, first of all, I need you to correct yourself in the air.
So I don't want you spinning in the air.
I want you to jump and I want you to land back in that square stance.
As soon as we land, we're using the ground as energy to burst off into a crossover step.
So now we're going lateral into a jump.
So I land from my regular penultimate max jump.
Boom.
Push straight over.
One, two.
Straight up in the air.
Really work on decelerating yourself.
I don't want you fading.
I want you to get a good stop.
and a straight vertical.
From here, again, I'm going to use the floor as a springboard, and I'm springing back over into that crossover one, two, straight up in the air, and stick that landing, okay?
That counts as one rep.
So it was penultimate, lateral to the left, lateral to the right.
That's three jumps, that counts as one rep, okay?
Keep going until you get the desired reps done, and then you bring it back with the opposite.
So then it's left-right penultimate, and then it's right-left.
So what we're doing with this drill is a lot of things, but most importantly, we're introducing different movements into the jump.
So it's not always going to be as smooth as
normal linear penultimate.
There's a lot of times where you're gonna be in basketball, you gotta get over with the crossover step and get up, or you just grab the rebound and you gotta power dribble and get up off that lateral.
So we're working on just our footwork into that jump because you could be that jumper that jumps 45 inches in warmups and gets all the dunks, but when you get in the game, you gotta be able to jump out of any position, any situation, so that you can actually use that vertical in a game.
Now for our freestyle dunks, I put this in there because it's so important that you get out there and just allow your body to explore different approaches, different type of dunks, different type of jumping styles without me always trying to put you in a box and trying to get you to do one thing.
So I want you to set the clock for 10 minutes and I just want you to go get as many dunks as you can.
Take breaks in between if you need to.
I do want you to be recovered in between reps.
This isn't an endurance workout.
So get up off one foot.
Throw it down.
Walk back.
Recover for 30 seconds to a minute.
Come back in.
Take off off two.
Try to dunk left.
Whatever you want to do, get creative and do it.
Of course, if you can't dunk and all you can do is touch the bottom of the net, I don't care.
I still want you to get creative.
Come in off two and touch the net.
Come from baseline, get up off one and touch the net.
Try to jump off left, touch with the left.
Variability, variety is the key to longevity and it's super important for building kind of well-rounded explosiveness and athleticism.
And so I want you to get creative, set the clock for 10 minutes, and just freestyle dunk.
we need two boxes or two chairs or two benches anything that is the same height you could even do a box and a bench or a box in a chair doesn't matter as long as we got two things at the same height that are nice and stable now if we can do band resistance that's our best option so if you have some heavy dumbbells that we can anchor our bands to and then get the band right around the hip
So I'm in my shoulder elevated hip bridge position.
So my shoulder blades are on the box or on the bench.
I have one leg up and then my other leg, the leg that I'm working is at 90 degrees.
I want to make sure that my mid foot is on the corner of that box.
So I'm not driving down on the top of the box, but I'm also not on the side of the box.
I'm right on the corner of that box.
we do want to make sure that box is nice and stable if it's not heavy put some dumbbells or some weighted plates on the other side of it so that it doesn't slide out during this exercise so now from here i'm going band resisted and i'm just doing a single leg hip bridge so i hinge
My butt is gonna be about an inch to two inches off the floor and then explode up to full hip extension.
Squeeze for one to two seconds in that glute at the top and then release back down into your hip hinge, explode back into that hip extension.
We should feel a very big burn
in the glutes you'll also feel a little bit in the hamstrings if you feel it more in your lower back then you know that something is going wrong on this exercise we should feel a little burn in those erector muscles the muscles around your spine but those should not be the primary muscles involved in this exercise
Now we really want to use bands because at the top, the band resistance is at its highest.
And just like in sprinting, we need our glutes and our hamstrings to be strongest near hip extension.
And so with bands, it's not giving us a lot of resistance at the bottom, but near full hip extension, it's giving us the most resistance.
That's why we really want to use bands here.
But if you don't have bands and you just have a sandbag or a medicine ball or a kettlebell or something like that,
That's okay.
Go ahead and hold that in position.
Find a comfortable position.
Use a pad if you need to and then put the weight on top of that pad and you're just going through the same range of motion.
Get that good squeeze in the glute up at the top.
We want to build that mind muscle connection.
so this whole exercise i want to think about my body in a sea of white and that glute is lighting up bright red so studies have shown that we can actually get higher muscle activation when we start to get that mind muscle connection so that's a little trick think about that muscle that we're working and make it light up bright red
So for the Dratch RFESS, we are going to go in our normal rear foot elevated split squat position.
My dumbbells are on the ground.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
I'm going to grab the dumbbells and basically I'm going explosive rear foot elevated, except I'm going to slam into the ground with that front foot.
So I'm going to lift up a couple inches and I'm just going to push down.
then I'm gonna explode up so it's boom explode straight up now the reason why we're doing that is because we want to get that really hard ground reaction force so the issue is in lifting we do everything sort of
controlled and ground-based and then on the court everything is a hard foot strike we have high ground reaction forces and so this is an exercise that kind of blends the two kind of takes the best of both worlds where we're still getting the high force from strength training but we're also getting that tendon loading like we would get on the court
All right, so start light.
I generally go about 15 pounds in each hand.
If I was getting into a little of the heavier side, I would go about 25.
But you will notice when you're really slamming into the floor and trying to get up quick, as you go too heavy, if you get up to like 35 or 45 in each hand, you're going to start to get a little bit slower.
I do want you to be explosive.
but if you feel like you can leave the ground then it's too light.
So if you were holding 15s and you got up so explosively that you could actually leave the floor with that front foot then it is a little bit too light.
In that case I would want you to go up.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
And I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down
to the elbows, and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side, same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't gonna be able to get our heel all the way to the floor, that's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for phase three, day two, and day four.
Already a pretty short workout.
You probably shouldn't have to take out anything.
If you really need to cut down, we can take out the mobility drills if you're already pretty flexible and pretty mobile.
Now, if you don't want to go to the gym and you just want to do this workout at home, you could always hook up a band and do the split stance anti-rotation, or if you don't have a band, just skip the split stance anti-rotation.
You can do everything else at home.
The lateral flexion, you can do this with a band.
If you don't have a band, we can get the same qualities from a side plank.
So do a regular side plank, three times 30 seconds for your reps and everything else you can really do body weight at home.
So if it's a hassle to go to the gym, you could always do this workout from home.
If you're at the gym already, then obviously it's more beneficial to use the cable machine, but it's up to you.
Whatever's more convenient, let's get after it.
So the first thing we're going to do for our dynamic warm-up is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just going to do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I want to stay on the ball of the foot.
and i'm just going to go about 50 of my max speed i'm not going too fast yet we're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips for the seal jacks it's basically like a jumping jack except i'm going to coordinate arms with the legs so i'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time back to neutral over with the left over with the left hand and then i'm just going to speed that up i'm going to get a good little rhythm going here
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can.
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two, three.
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
Alright.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for our split stance anti-rotation ABCs, what I'm gonna do is capital letters A through J. Now I want you in a split stance.
So think about if you were gonna drop your feet, that is the position, that's our base position that we're working with here because
When we drop to that position and get into our drive, we always take hand checks, we always take hits to one side of our body and a lot of us fly into rotation.
We have to have that anti-rotation core strength so that we can push through those situations.
But too often we get good anti-rotation in that square stance and we never get it in that actual split stance.
What I'm gonna do is get to that position, nice and low, I gotta brace my core here, nice and strong, my breath is normal, and then I'm gonna press right out in front of my chest, and I'm gonna start that ABC, so capital letter A, capital B,
capital C, all right?
A through J, and then I switch it and I do it the other way.
Make sure that the inside foot, so the foot that's closer to the cable machine is back, all right?
And then when we switch, that left foot is back.
Now, if you don't have the cable machine, of course, you could just use a band hooked up to a power rack or something nice and stable.
We're going to get very similar effects there.
But if you can, we would want to use the cable and, of course, start light and gradually go up.
We do want to get as heavy as we can here.
The heavier we get, the more we're going to get stable in that split stance position, fire up that core, get nice and strong and stable so that we can be dominant once we hit the core or the field.
So for the band distracted hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go around my right leg, so just one leg, and I'm gonna get the band as high as I can at that hip, right where that hip hinge is, okay?
I'm gonna step up and get some good tension, and I'm just gonna come to that heel, and I'm gonna try to straighten out that right knee, and then I'm just gonna let that band really pull my hips back into a big hip hinge as I slide my hands down until my hands touch my toe.
So I'm here, hip hinge, touch, and then back up.
Squeeze the glutes at the top to really pull your hips through.
Okay, so we have that initial slight bend.
From there, it's hips back, back, back, touch, and then pull through with the glutes.
I should feel a really big stretch in the hamstrings at the bottom of that stretch.
Now, a lot of you guys, to try to get down, you're gonna start to round your back.
If that's the case, then we don't have to go so low.
Make sure you keep your shoulder blades tight, like you're holding an imaginary pencil in between your shoulder blades, and just go as low as we can.
Now that might mean fingertips right past the knee, that might mean mid-shin, or ideally that's going to be touching the toe without rounding the back.
Whatever you can work with, work with that and let's get better over time.
So for my lateral flexion, I'm going to use a cable machine.
If you don't have a cable machine, just use a band hooked up to a power rack.
And I'm going to interlock my fingers on the handle.
I'm going to pull out.
Now make sure it's on the high setting so that when I'm in full extension, it's parallel to the floor.
So I don't want you standing up high so that it's slanted.
I need this cable to be parallel.
So that means I'm going to have to bend my knees and I'm going to have to have it on the highest setting.
We are here, the problem is most people go into back hyperextension and their pelvis anteriorly rotates.
So it's here, we need to posteriorly rotate.
So think about if you had a tail, we're tucking that tail so you're there.
That takes care of that back issue so we're nice and flat, all right?
We have to stay in that pelvis position the whole set.
And now from here, I'm just going lateral flexion,
and lateral flexion the other way, all right?
Don't cut it short.
A lot of people go here and then they just go concentric.
A big part of this exercise is that loading, that eccentric.
We're loading up that lateral line, getting that strong, powerful sling.
This is gonna be more of a slow and controlled exercise.
We do wanna go up as heavy as we can once we get our form down.
We should feel this in the side of the core.
Of course, you're gonna feel it a little bit in your back, a little bit in your front core, but those obliques is what we're really targeting with this exercise.
For the elastic leg kicks, I want you to think about a normal, kind of like a Frankenstein kick, except we're gonna make it a little bit more rapid and a little bit more elastic.
So I'm just gonna stay on the balls of the feet and I'm just gonna kick up my leg as high as I can, keeping that knee straight, and I'm just gonna switch every time so it ends up being a little bit of a skip.
and then a straight leg kick.
Now I'm popping off the balls of the feet.
I do not want your heels to touch the floor.
And the reason why we're doing this, you're not going to get a huge burn.
This isn't a huge workout.
We're trying to get some elasticity back in the post chain, some elasticity in the hamstrings.
So a lot of people sit there and stretch or even do a normal dynamic warmup for elasticity.
The thing is for a muscle to actually increase elasticity, it has to be under one second.
So if I'm going slow with that kick or if I'm holding
a stretch it might increase what we call plasticity how flexible we get but not elasticity and elasticity is what actually translates to sprinting and jumping so everything has to be under one second and that's why we're going rapid with those kicks i want you to think about getting that leg up as quick as you can as high as you can
So for the leg lowers, you gotta make sure that you anchor your hands to something stable.
So I'm holding onto a power rack.
Make sure that whatever you're holding onto is nice and stable so that that's your support.
If worse comes worse and all you have is a partner, your partner could stand over you and they could just grab onto your ankles, all right?
So what we're doing is negative.
So we're gonna go three to four seconds on the eccentric.
So that means my legs are straight up and I'm going three to four seconds down.
I'm trying to keep my knees as straight as possible.
So control down the heel, stop a couple inches short of the floor, and then we bend our knees and bring it back.
So I don't want the concentric to be the hard part.
So that's why we're bending our knees, coming back, extend the knees so that our legs are nice and long, and then we go back into that lowering phase.
If that is too easy, then we can keep our knees straight and go straight on the up and on the down, but I would rather you really focus on that slow, controlled, eccentric, really squeezing that core with every rep.
Now, where we wanna feel this,
exercise is mostly front core so that abdominal wall should be fired up.
This is one exercise where we are going to get a pretty good burn.
If you're not getting a burn I would extend the reps a little bit so go up a couple reps to the point where you are getting that big burn in the front core.
So for the double band lateral push out, what I'm going to do is use a mini band.
I'm going to put it right above my knees.
I'm using Ethereal.
It's more of like a cloth material, kind of stretchy material, so it's not going to break.
But if you have the normal basic elastic resistance bands, that's okay.
So right above the knees and then I'm stepping in to the pro band.
Alright, now I like to link two bands together and then link it to something nice and stable like a power rack just because it gives me a little more room.
If you don't have two bands, you could probably still just link one band around the power rack and then step in.
What I'm gonna do is step out until I got some good resistance with this pro band.
And then I'm just gonna start in a basic squat stance, and now from here I'm just pushing out laterally as hard as I can, and I'm gonna hold there for a second, and then push back.
So it's drive, push back, drive,
push back so what you'll notice is off this right leg I'm getting full extension at that knee so I'm not doing just a little step like we normally would with a mini band to light up the glutes okay I'm pushing out against this band boom full extension just like somebody's driving and I gotta really push into that first step okay so it's drive out push back drive out push back now
We get the typical workout that we would with a mini band, right?
So I'm getting that good abduction.
I'm firing up that glute.
I'm really firing up this glute because I'm also pushing against this band.
So it's the best of both worlds.
We're working abductors here.
We're working the extensor muscles that we need so badly when it comes to improving explosiveness, especially when it comes to improving our lateral speed.
This drill is insane at improving your ability to apply force in the ground laterally.
So I'm going to hit my reps to one side.
I'm going to flip over and I'm going to hit my reps to the other side.
Remember, it's all about max intent.
We need big speed, big force.
Let's get it.
If you don't have the ankle mobility to keep your heels down and sit in that bottom position, then I want you to grab the weight
and I want you to come into a deep squat without the heels on the ground.
So I would just come forward, my knees are over the toes, and now from here, elbows are resting on the knees, and I'm just trying to sit the heels down as low as I can.
If you can get the heels down, great.
Then we're going to just rock side to side, trying to drive that knee right over the middle of my foot.
And we're just going to rock there.
Now, if you can't get your heels down, just get as far as you can.
All right.
So I'm pushing my heels as close as I can, but they are off the ground.
Now from here, I'm just going to rock side to side.
All right.
And we're still going to get ankle mobility, even though the heels aren't on the ground.
And week after week, we can start to get the heels closer and closer until we're able to really sit with a flat foot and rock side to side and get that good ankle mobility.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day one and day five of phase three.
These workouts are already very efficient.
You should be able to get them done very quick.
We really shouldn't have to take out anything on these days.
Notice that as we increase in intensity, we decrease in volume.
You can't have high volume and high intensity year round.
You're just gonna burn out.
So we are higher intensity, but we are lower volume for this phase.
So if you're pressed for time, take out the foam roll circuit, do the dynamic warm up.
You can take out the plate overhead deep squat.
This exercise isn't as much for strength as it is just motor control, mobility and stability.
So if you have the time, do it.
But if you're pressed for time, skip it.
We always want to do our half kneeling change of direction, our non-counter movement lateral to sprint.
If we're pressed for time, take both of those exercises down to two sets.
Weighted jump, high pull, this exercise is absolutely essential.
Of course, listen to what I say in the video because this is for advanced athletes.
You don't want to do this if you're not already advanced and you haven't been training for years.
Velocity squats, this is absolutely essential.
Do make sure that you're really listening to the details in that video because the details can be a game changer in improving your explosiveness when it comes to velocity-based training.
Make sure that we are doing that and the 15 foot approach jump.
We have to do our band back extension or a weighted back extension.
That's going to get our post chain fired up.
Ball of the foot, one leg turn.
If you're pressed for time, skip it.
But this exercise,
really leads to great gains in multi-directional change of direction.
Overall, single leg stability, great exercise.
You guys are going to like it, and it's very challenging, so do try to get that in.
7-11 breathing, we got to do it.
Static stretching, we don't even have it in here.
If we're stretching every day, you're probably overdoing it.
We do not want to build
too much flexibility.
Too much flexibility is actually going to decrease our vertical jump.
Some days you're going to notice that we don't have any static stretching.
If you're extremely tight and you can't get into normal deep squat positions, lunge positions, then that static stretch makes sense to put it back in there.
That is optional.
If you want to do a static stretch, you could, but most of you guys really don't need it, especially for this day.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
so you could either go this way or you could go vertical so if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute now always if we want more pressure we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I want to stay on the ball of the foot, and I'm just going to go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs, so I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral.
Over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here.
Maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed.
So we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go over with the left leg.
I'm gonna come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't wanna go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch, so I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight, and I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles, and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral, and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor.
keep this knee straight because i want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor i'm going back with the hip like i would in a normal squat and i'm getting nice and low touch the floor and i'm popping out to that other side all right so let's just hold about one second at the bottom
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one
Two, three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
Alright.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
one, two, three, lean, one, two, three, heels back down, one, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
For the plate overhead deep squat, we're really working on mobility and trunk stability.
So I want you to start light.
You can start with a five or a 10 pound plate overhead.
I'm doing it with a 25 pound plate.
If you're really strong and your mobility is really, really good, you can get all the way up to a 45 pound plate.
So what I'm gonna do
is I'm just gonna start on the ground, regular squat position, feet a little wider than shoulder width apart, and I'm going straight up with the plate.
So I gotta keep this plate right above my head without tipping forward, and then from here I'm just going into a deep squat.
as low as i can and right back up i got to actively push back and up with the shoulders so that i don't drop out in front of my forehead like that all right try to keep the heels down all the way through this exercise
You're probably going to feel a burn in the shoulders because we're getting a ton of stability and isometric strength there, but I really want you to strengthen up the erectors, these are the back muscles, the core muscles, and work on that hip and ankle mobility as well.
Now, if that is too difficult for you, and as you go down you're pitching it out in front of your forehead and you can't keep it back, or you can keep it back but your heels are coming up at the bottom, then go ahead and use some small plates
to elevate your heels and then go through the same exact thing and you're going to find that you can drop a lot lower because we're sort of taking the ankles out of the equation with that heel lift.
So start there if that's more comfortable and then gradually, day after day, week after week, try to progress to getting away from the elevated heels and getting back to regular deep squat with your heels on the ground.
For our AI walks we're getting nice and shifty so all it is an AI cross is a loose cross where basically he gets thin so feet are narrow and then he takes a wide step out notice this knee drops in to sell that movement and he shifts his body weight so it's not here like a lot of you guys do or in football where your torso stays here you got to shift that torso over this knee so I'm really shifting my weight this direction
That's what really sells this move.
And then I just pop the other way.
So the other mistake that people make is after they get that shift, they try to explode into that next step.
From this position, you have no leverage to really put force in the ground and cover distance.
And so after this sell, you want a repositioning step where we're here.
So that left foot is just a recovery step so that we have a good chin angle so that I can push off the other way.
Right, so your typical AI cross would be here, boom.
boom so your cell leg becomes your stride leg not how most of you guys do it where this is your cell leg and then this is your stride leg that's not how we get out of a cut so all we're doing is accumulating reps with that ai cross we're gonna get nice and rhythmic with it so we're just going side to side i don't need you sprinting out we're just working on that shiftiness aspect so all it is long step shift the torso here recover one two
push here recover one two push all right so that's all it is and then we're just walking it for 10 yards so i'm just here here here here
All right, reminder, regardless of the sport, if we're always down in this low position, we're not as shifty as we would be if we can kind of get up, relax, get thin, and then push ourselves into that low position, shift our body weight.
So notice when I'm recovering from here, I'm raising back up and then I'm striking this foot
to push and sell in this direction and then i cross now this is going to be my strike foot so i'm here strike push and then recover strike push recover strike push recover all right that's all it is that's an ai hanging cross funny thing is it's the same footwork for a lot of sports anybody who has to shift somebody else is going to end up using this same footwork at one time or another
So for my non-counter movement lateral to sprint, I'm sitting on a box where my thighs will be parallel to the floor.
So you can sit on a box, a bench, a chair.
Now the reason that we're starting sitting down is so that we take out the stretch shortening cycle, which then means my nervous system has to activate muscle fibers faster.
So this is training that rate of force development.
I'm going to start with a little bit of a torso lean.
So I'm in a good position where my feet are a little bit wider than shoulder width.
I'm in this little lean.
So as soon as I lift up this foot and push off as hard as I can with that right foot, I'm going to get very far laterally.
All right.
So it's going to be a lateral jump.
So it's boom.
Now, once I land on this left foot, a lot of you guys are going to fade and try to take off in your sprint.
We need to stop that habit right now.
I need you to change directions sharp so it's lateral, plant, straight to linear.
The athletes that can change from lateral to linear become the most successful athletes.
It's here, push out, drive, push straight forward, work on that stride length, get somewhere with that first step and really sprint it through as fast as you can, half court.
If you have a full court to yourself or you're doing this on the track, why not take it to a full 94 feet and really start to work on that sprint speed.
For this exercise, if you have a med ball in the range of 10 to 25 pounds, let's use that and we're just gonna do our high tosses.
I wanna stand right over it, all right?
So I want my hips right over that med ball so that when I go down, I'm not reaching forward.
so my hips are right over this med ball from there it's a hip hinge so think about how you would set up for a deadlift position right here that's the same position that we're in for this med ball toss so hinge from the hips knees above the shoelace and then i'm just grabbing that ball right here i should feel like i'm wound up in the post chain so my glutes are already on a good little pre-stretch and i'm ready for big explosion and then from there i'm just tossing so it's just
toss as high as I can you see that triple extension I'm coming up to the toes just like I'm gonna jump but I don't actually have to take off I'm trying to put all that energy into getting the ball as high as I possibly can now a lot of people end up throwing it forward
If you're throwing it forward, you're probably also staying tucked at the hip here.
I need you to get tall at the top so we get that full hip extension.
Now, if you do that, the ball is going to go straight up and straight down.
Sometimes it might even go back a little bit.
So the ball might end up landing behind you.
I'm completely okay with that.
Do make sure to get out of the way because you got a heavy medicine ball falling towards your head.
So I need you to toss and then watch the ball the entire time and get out of the way until the ball hits the floor.
Now, I know a lot of you guys don't have a medicine ball.
If you don't have a medicine ball, you can just do a box jump.
We're still getting some good concentric power and we're not getting the same eccentric forces that we would get when we land on the ground.
Remember, it's not about the height of that box.
We wanna be able to jump up and float to that box and land in a quarter squat position.
So if it's so high that you can barely get on there, then that's causing more harm than good.
Now for the beginner athlete, if you don't have a medicine ball to toss, I also don't want you jumping yet.
So what you're going to do is just speed squats.
So you can come down about one second and explode up nice and fast to the toes.
If you don't have the balance and you need to do this on a TRX strap or hold on to a power rack or a pole for some balance, that's fine.
What we're after is exposing your body to some fast movements.
For beginners, we can actually stimulate and train some fast twitch muscle fibers.
For your intermediate and advanced athletes, that's not going to be enough.
So that's why I advise you doing either the box jump or the medicine ball toss.
But no matter which exercise you choose, I want you to make sure that we're getting max intent, max explosiveness on the way up.
Now, if you are a beginner, but the speed squats are too easy, you can always add a weighted vest, add a backpack, something like that, some light handheld weights, some way that you can gradually start to overload it.
Get yourself a little bit of additional load while we're still exploding up fast to the toes.
So for our velocity squats, we are gonna do a box squat.
If you don't have the box, that's okay.
You can still do a normal squat.
Without the box, we're just going down to parallel to the floor.
So I need you to find a box that is about parallel to the floor when you're sitting on it.
So my thighs are parallel in that position, all right?
I'm gonna go about 60% of my max.
You guys know I'm not huge on maxing out, but kind of estimate what your one rep max would be, then go about 60% of that.
Now with that weight, we're going to control down for one to two seconds, we're going to sit on the box for maybe half a second, and then we're going to explode up as fast as we can.
Now, if your feet are leaving the ground, it's too light, we got to go up.
Generally, what we're going for is max power, which is around 0.8 meters per second.
Now, I know you guys probably don't have the velocity trackers.
If you don't have the velocity trackers, that's completely okay because those are expensive.
I want you to time yourself.
So set up a phone and time yourself.
You want to get up from the bottom to the very top on your toes at about 0.5 seconds.
So if it's taking you longer than a half a second to get from here to here, then it's too slow, okay?
So is that gonna be super accurate?
No, it's not, but when you time yourself, you can start to see the improvements.
And most importantly, because you have that stopwatch on you, you're gonna get max intent and you're gonna really start to compete with yourself.
Of course, this is an advanced exercise.
If you do not have perfect squat form and you're not experienced in the back squat, you are going to do a normal either goblet squat or back squat just with perfect form, slow and controlled.
We only do max intent if you are pretty well trained and your form is absolutely perfect on the back squat.
So, if my one rep max was around 300, I'm gonna go around 185 on the bar, and I'm gonna try to accelerate as fast as I can.
Now, it is cheating coming to the toes.
You're not supposed to come to your toes, but most of our competitive athletes, when they get max intent, they do end up bringing the heels up a little bit.
If you're advanced and you have the balance to do that, okay, great.
But just keep in mind, it is more of an injury risk when we're coming up on the toes because we're off balance.
And if you are using a velocity tracker, it throws it off a little bit.
If you do come up on the toes, I'm not mad at you as long as you can keep your balance.
So I'm coming in and I'm going to go ahead and demo with the real weight because why not?
Alright, I'm stepping back.
You got to make sure that you're close enough to that box, alright?
I don't want to miss the box on the way down.
Normal squat mechanics, my feet are a little wider than shoulder width.
I personally like to point the toes out a little bit so I angle them out so they're not straightforward.
I'm going to sit down slow, pause for half a second and then explode up.
All right, as fast as I can, nice and explosive.
That was probably right around 0.8 meters per second, ooh, 0.79.
Again, if you don't have the velocity tracker, do it with a phone and you can put it in an app.
There's apps like Coach's Eye that have a stopwatch feature for very cheap, probably a couple dollars.
Now, on the actual box squat,
I don't want you to really relax on the box.
So a lot of people come down, they sit, they relax, and they lose that tension, and that can be really problematic.
I need you to sit and maintain that angle, alright?
So I'm here, my knees stay in that position, I'm not rocking back.
So I'm keeping that same angle, I'm keeping tension through the core nice and tight, and then explode up as fast as I can from there.
I'm okay with you sitting down for half a second or a second, but I do not want you to relax and lose that angle.
So for our 15 foot approach jump, all we're doing is measuring out 15 feet and then jumping and touching as high as we can.
So I can go on the basketball court and just start at the free throw line and then aim to touch the rim.
Or if you can already touch the rim, try to dunk.
If you can already dunk, try to do a dunk that you've never done before, okay?
All we're concerned about is getting as high as you possibly can on every rep.
This is an opportunity for you to work on your jumping mechanics.
okay so I just want you to start with a lean so you're gonna kind of start with a lean and then fall into it and then take that recovery step so that's gonna help us build up our acceleration and most of us are probably gonna get three steps so if I was jumping right left
Then I would lean and I would take a step with my left.
So then it's left, right, left, take off.
Now everybody's different.
Maybe you can get four steps or five steps based on your leg length and your speed.
But most of us will probably get three or four.
So after the certain amount of reps with right, left, we're going to go to the other side.
And then it's lean, fall, right, left, right.
Get up as high as we can.
Use this as an opportunity to work on your form.
And if you can, film yourself or have a friend film you so that you can look at your mechanics afterwards.
So for our back extension, we're gonna use a regular back extension machine.
Now, I like to use a band, so I loop a band around the bottom.
If it's a light band,
then we can kind of choke up on it and hold it low so we have more resistance.
If it is a heavier band, then we can just hold it at full length, all right?
Now, I'm not too concerned with the range of motion of going low.
Go to whatever's comfortable and then we got to get up to full extension.
The reason I love using the band is because it provides a little more resistance at the top so we can get that really hard glute contraction at the very top
of the range of motion now one mistake that people make is they end up going into hyper extension i just want you in full extension so that your head and your heel are in one flat line i don't want your head to be back beyond your heels all right if you do not have the back extension machine you're going to do the alternative exercise which is the reverse plank so we're going to get the two benches we're going to hold in our normal reverse plank position that you've done before
and now you should be strong enough to start loading up.
So maybe put a 25 pound plate right on your hip.
If that's too light, 45 pound plate.
If that's too light, then just start stacking plates and hold them and have a friend take them on and off for each set.
we are doing the back extension or the reverse plank.
We are really targeting the glutes and we're really targeting them at that hip extension.
So when we sprint, that is where that main torque is.
That's where the big torque is through the hips near extension.
So we can't just get that through squats and deadlifts.
That's why exercises like the back extension or the reverse plank are so important.
Let's get it.
So for my ball of the foot, one leg turns, I'm going to come to the ball of my foot.
I cannot have my heel down on the ground.
So we're decreasing that surface area, increasing the stability needs.
So I'm here pointing that big foot down into the ground.
First, just find your balance.
Now, if you find it there, we're coming into an RDL.
Try to get the torso flat to the ground.
And now from here, I'm just doing turns.
All right, as big as I can back to neutral and then to the other side.
Now those turns might be very small like this to start, but as you get better, I want you to do full turns, full rotations up as high as we can.
All right, you're going to feel the feet completely burning from the toes all the way back up through the heels, back up through the calves, lateral aspects of the calves.
The lower leg and the feet are going to be firing the outside muscles and those small intrinsic muscles.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I gotta get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for day three of phase four.
Same thing here, very short and efficient workout.
Don't skip anything unless you're in season and your encore volume is too high to handle all of these additional plyometrics.
If that's the case, go back to phase one or phase two, take some of those strength exercises and put them in here.
Do not beat yourself down in season or do not push through knee pain or back pain, any type of joint pain.
If you have any type of pain, you're going to skip the workout.
But assuming you're good to go and you're healthy, then let's get nice and elastic, nice and bouncy.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now always if we want more pressure we can cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one, we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
And then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
And I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're going to go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch i'm just going to go over with the left leg i'm going to come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there i'm gonna go five cycles and then i'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo i'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and i'm going down i'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because i want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor i'm going back with the hip like i would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two, three.
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
All right.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm going to get a really good isometric contraction and I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we've got to get them revved up for our session.
So for my band resisted first step explosion, I'm gonna use any super band.
If you have two bands, link them together so you have a little more range to work with.
If not, that's okay.
Just hook your one super band up to a power rack.
The key here is we're starting with a level change.
So that means we're gonna start high and then we're gonna drop down into that athletic stance.
Too often we start in an athletic stance and then we move from there.
but in basketball in any sport there's a lot of times where we're caught in this high position and then we have to go so we have to get down back into that athletic stance and then work from there so like a basketball player a lot of times is selling a shot so they're here and then they decide to get to the rim then they got to drop into this stance so it's a level change
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna start high on the toes, and I'm just gonna drop down into a square stance, all right?
So it's here, drop, and then once I land there, it's a crossover step, push out as far as we can, and walk it back.
So it's crossover step.
If I'm going right, I'm going cross with the left.
I'm getting as far as I can in that one step, nice and explosive, nice and quick, and then walk it back, all right?
So then I go to the other side, start high,
drop, push, and come back.
I need you to think about really pushing into the floor.
So it's high, drop, and then really push as hard as you can down and back.
We're getting a good shin angle.
So if you film yourself on this exercise, you'll notice when you take off at toe off, we should have that really good shin angle.
A lot of you are going to have more of a vertical shin angle, which means you put force in the ground this way instead of this way.
So the more horizontal we can get that shin, the more we're going to get forward with that step.
All right, let's get it.
So for the dumbbell power skips, we're gonna go anywhere from a 10 pound dumbbell to a 50 pound dumbbell.
We've never had an athlete who needed more than 50 pounds because again, this is all about reactiveness, all about quickness off the floor.
So I generally go around 25 pounds for these.
So I'm gonna start high with the right foot.
I'm gonna go into the floor and it's gonna be a low skip right, high skip left.
So every time my left comes down and hits the floor, I get up as high as I can.
So it's right, low, left, high.
Right, low, left, high.
So your right foot
is just your recovery foot.
Your left leg is really the working leg here.
And then on the way back, I'm gonna switch it.
So now I start left high.
I'm gonna go left, low, right, get up.
Left, low, right, get up.
Key component here is the stiffness aspect.
As I'm going into that jump, I don't want the heel to collapse.
I gotta stay strong on the ball of the foot without the heel hitting the ground.
On the high jump,
I'm going to land at about a 45 degree angle and I'm going to push up from there.
So I don't want you striding out and getting really low.
I want you to produce high power with a short range of motion, just like we often have to do in a game off one foot.
So for my one leg hurdle jumps, I'm just going to set up two hurdles.
I'm going to set them up about 15 feet apart to start.
That's kind of the easier version and then we're going to mix up that distance later on.
So I'm going with the high hurdles from Champion Sports.
You don't need these.
All you need is a small hurdle, even a pair of shoes.
It doesn't really matter.
All that matters is that you're jumping as high as you can and that we have some sort of marker so that we can work on our timing and our steps.
I'm going to jump over, so I'm going to get a running start, I don't care how far it is.
Running start, jump off the left, get over that hurdle, now you're going to land on your right.
So then it would be right, left, right, left, take off again.
So we're always taking off with our left and then we get over and we land with our right, okay?
so so much of the jump is timing rhythm and being able to take short steps and then long steps and so the easier version is where we have this set distance and it's like at least 15 feet apart so we can get those multiple steps in between now as you get good at this I want you to mess around with that distance so start to shorten it up maybe you put it
you know, eight to ten feet away and now all you can do is get a right left jump.
So I want you to split it up by days.
I think the first day that you do this drill, let's just keep it long distance to where it's the most comfortable for you.
We can get multiple steps.
The next day maybe shorten it up a little bit and then the next day shorten it up even more to the point where we're getting over this first hurdle and all we can do is get right left jump.
all right so i want you to mix it up the more you mix up the distance the harder it's going to be for you and the more versatile we're going to be with our jumps
So for my explosive box step up, this is a traditional step up jump so I need that box bench or chair to be nice and stable and right below knee height.
I do not want it above knee height.
I'm going to get my whole foot on there so my heel is on.
A mistake that people make is they bring that heel off and just the ball of the foot on.
So I want that full heel on, right knee up, left hand up.
I'm going to have to collapse the torso just a little bit so I don't want a completely upright torso on this exercise so I'm bringing
that torso forward just a little bit, and then from here, it's just pier explosion.
Get as high as you can.
Now, if you wanna drive this opposite leg, you can, but a lot of people end up clipping their toe on the box or the bench or the chair.
So if that's the case, you can just leave that foot behind.
So you can either drive and come back down or you can leave this leg back and come back down.
I would prefer if you do drive that but again it is kind of tough for some people because they do clip that foot.
So max explosiveness, I'm getting off this box as high as I can and then I'm landing and I get back up into that jump as quick as I can.
Now do not jump if you're off balance.
So a lot of people, they get a good first jump
they come down and then they're off balance and they try to jump again.
You have to regather your balance before you go.
When you get good at this, it can start to become very rapid where you don't have to rebalance, but your first couple times doing this exercise, you might have to come down, reset for a couple seconds, and then go from there, all right?
Now make sure that this foot lands first.
So a lot of people they jump and then they try to bring the back foot down first.
That's too much stress on that back leg.
So I need you to land and absorb contact with that front leg first and then that back leg hits.
Don't push off that back leg too hard.
Think about that back leg as a non-working leg.
It's just a long for the ride.
So I don't want you to really push off the ground.
Just tap and go.
So this exercise is great for building that concentric power, that power on the way up, especially off one leg.
This is going to translate to double leg jumping, and it's going to translate to single leg jumping.
This is a very conventional, old school exercise that stands the test of time.
This consistently gets athletes more explosive.
Let's get it.
Now for our freestyle dunks, I put this in there because it's so important that you get out there and just allow your body to explore different approaches, different type of dunks, different type of jumping styles without me always trying to put you in a box and trying to get you to do one thing.
So I want you to set the clock for 10 minutes and I just want you to go get as many dunks as you can.
Take breaks in between if you need to.
I do want you to be recovered in between reps.
This isn't an endurance workout.
So get up off one foot.
Throw it down.
Walk back.
Recover for 30 seconds to a minute.
Come back in.
Take off off two.
Try to dunk left.
Whatever you want to do, get creative and do it.
Of course, if you can't dunk and all you can do is touch the bottom of the net, I don't care.
I still want you to get creative.
Come in off two and touch the net.
Come from baseline, get up off one and touch the net.
Try to jump off left, touch with the left.
Variability, variety is the key to longevity and it's super important for building kind of well-rounded explosiveness and athleticism.
And so I want you to get creative, set the clock for 10 minutes, and just freestyle dunk.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you wanna reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
And I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just going to go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm going to sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here but this is a glute stretch for this left leg but at the same time for a lot of you this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side so i'm just going to pull back hold for 15 seconds after 15 seconds i'm switching over to that other side trying to get full range of motion with that other leg
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee.
So we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius.
That's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day two and day four of phase four.
Really, there's nothing that we can take out here.
If you're super mobile and super flexible, we can take out all of the mobility work and just do the core exercises, but I do recommend that we get in everything as is on this program.
It's already a pretty short workout, so it's not going to take too long to get through.
As always, on our core workouts, you can do this Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.
Saturday is optional.
You don't have to do it, but if you have the time and you have the energy, might as well do it.
Let's get it.
So for my rocking dead bug, I'm going to use a basketball, volleyball, or any type of ball around this size.
If you don't have that, that's okay.
So I'm going to pin it between my knee and my elbow.
Now if I don't have the ball, then I'm just going to try to touch elbow to knee.
It's actually going to be a little bit more difficult, a little more hip range of motion.
So if I have that ball, I'm going to pin it, lay your head back.
I want to make sure that I'm not hyperextended in my back.
So a lot of people come into this extension where if you slipped your hand under there, there's a big space.
I want you to think about crushing that person's hand.
So push down.
You got to think about posteriorly tilting your pelvis.
So that means like if you had a tail, you would tuck your tail.
And when you tuck your tail, you make your back flat.
So from that flat back position, I am just going to extend the opposite side.
So I'm going to extend my left hand with the left leg at the same time.
Notice I'm not touching the floor.
So I just come a couple inches off the ground with that left side and I come back to that base position.
Now from there I rock up.
So it's a rock position.
get the heels down to the ground and rock back slowly that counts as one rep and then you go back in now notice that i'm not using a bunch of momentum to rock up i want to start from this dead stopped position and then i just create that momentum with my core so it's dead stop position i'm nice and still
and rock up.
So if you do that the right way, that rock up is gonna really fire up the front abs.
All right, so we do the desired reps to one side and then you go to the other side and finish out.
So for our hamstring floss, we're just going to go lying on our back.
I want to make sure that my left leg stays down, so I'm actively pushing this left knee through the ground, pushing my left heel down through the ground, and I'm just going to pull back.
So here in this position, I'm going to feel a little bit of a stretch in my glute, a little bit of a stretch in that opposite hip flexor, and then I'm just
extending that knee and coming back into flexion.
So it's extension, flexion.
So we call this hamstring floss.
We're gradually trying to get that range of motion bigger and bigger.
In each rep, we're trying to extend that knee more and more.
So for my rocking plank, I'm going to come into a normal plank position.
So that means elbows directly underneath the shoulder.
From here, I'm going to make sure that I'm nice and flat.
So I don't want my hips sagging.
I don't want my hips hiking up.
I'm nice and flat, straight line from the back of my head down through my heels.
Now, as long as I own that position and I feel good there, I'm going to start to rock.
forwards and backwards nice and slow this whole time I'm really bracing my core I'm squeezing that core now in jumping we need to have the core to fire reflexively so that means we don't consciously think about squeezing the core otherwise it kills the fluidity of our movement so in training that's when we want to get that core nice and stable and teach ourselves how to really brace it and then on the court it'll start to happen more and more naturally
So make sure that you are squeezing the core like you're taking a big punch from Mike Tyson, but you still have to breathe throughout this exercise.
A lot of people start to hold their breath and that limits how long they can go on the exercise.
So make sure that you are breathing, but we are squeezing.
It's gonna get our core nice and strong, nice and stable.
Okay so for our lateral line stretch we want to get in a power rack or have something to hold on to.
You can even use like a TRX or you can do this without anything to hold on to.
I'll show you that regression.
So basically what we're doing is I'm going to step in here.
If I'm holding on with my left hand at about belly button height then I'm going to take my left foot
over the right foot all right now I'm gonna take my right hand over the head and I'm gonna grab onto that power rack all right already I feel a little bit of a stretch through that lateral line so it's through the outside of this leg and then all the way up through that lat so I'm gonna push away with my left hand and I'm gonna pull with my right hand so it's push
pull into that stretch.
I'm going to feel it big time through that lateral aspect of the hip, through that oblique area, and then into the lats.
This stretch is so important for athleticism because our fascial system is connected all the way from the feet.
all the way up through the shoulder everything is connected and so when we do stretches in isolation it doesn't truly work so we have to stretch the whole body as a system to really get good mobility gains and really build that good fascial health so then remember on the other side it would be right over left push away with the right hand
pull with the left hand and I'm only gonna hold for a couple seconds and then I'm gonna come back to neutral and then grab with the left hand one two and come back to neutral so we're making it dynamic this isn't just a static stretch now if you don't have anything to hold on to you can also do this without the rack it's not gonna be as good but we can still cross over right over left and then just pretend like we're here and shift as far as I can I'm thinking about
pushing my hip out this way and getting my left hand as far over my head as I can and then coming back.
So for my cable cross swing, what I'm gonna do is mimic my single leg dunking motion.
So a lot of you would go up for a single leg dunk and you would get that cross swing.
So if you were jumping off your right, you would load up the ball at the right hip, you would dip that left shoulder.
So we're really loading up the core and then recoiling from the core.
So it's not just the ball going, it's a full core movement.
So we're gonna mimic that now with a little bit of resistance.
So I'm interlocking the fingers.
I'm going to come into a split stance.
So notice the inside foot is always forward.
So the foot that is closest to that cable machine is always forward.
I'm going to load up here and then I'm just going to drive diagonally and I'm going to hold at the top.
So I want to get this thigh parallel to the floor if I can.
Now, half the battle is just the stability at the top.
A lot of you, that's going to be the hard part.
Make sure that you're going light enough to where you can stabilize at the top and will gradually go heavier as we get better.
Alright, so we're here, we load, explode and hold and then come back down.
I want you to think about driving with the leg, but also dipping that shoulder and ripping with the core.
Should be nice and explosive.
Of course, on a cable machine, we're not going 100% explosiveness, otherwise the weight's gonna be jerked up and down.
So maybe 80% of your max explosion.
Also, the faster you rip, the harder it is to stabilize at the top.
So make sure that you're going at a speed where you're still controlled enough so that you can be balanced and stabilized at the top.
Now, of course, if you don't have the cable, we can always use a band.
So just how the cable is around knee height, I can always hook up a band around a power rack or something nice and stable at that same knee height and rip from there, still get a great workout with the band.
For the hip flexor tilt, I'm just gonna use a box of bench or a chair.
I'm gonna get my back foot up so the top of my foot is on the bench.
I'm not gonna go with my toe on the bench.
Top of the foot on the bench, I'm just gonna come down.
Now I wanna get my heel touching my hips or as close as I can get to that.
If you have a pad, that'd be better.
I wouldn't do this on hardwood.
Make sure you got a nice, soft surface.
So I'm touching.
I'm in a straight line from my knee all the way up through my shoulders.
And I'm just going to sit here.
First, I'm going to get in a good position.
This ankle should be under that knee.
I should already feel a little bit of a stretch in that hip flexor, a little bit in the quad as well.
Now from here, I'm getting nice and wide.
I'm not going to lean forward.
And I'm going arms out.
and together now at the top with straight elbows not bent elbows at the top I'm going to lean towards the lead leg so that's to my right as far as I can
hold for five, and then come right back, okay?
And then we're hands down, all the way up, hands together, nice and tall, elongate through the spine, and lean towards that lead leg.
Three, two, one, back down, and we're back through.
for my side plank row i'm going to use a cable if you don't have a cable we can always use a band here i'm going to make sure that that cable is on the lower setting so that we're nice and flat with this cable and it's not aiming up and it's not aiming down so i'm going to get into my side plank position on that forearm i'm going to make sure that i'm grounded from the wrist all the way through the elbow
And I'm just gonna stack the feet nice and flat.
I'm gonna be nice and flat from toes all the way up to my head.
Okay, I'm not sinking, I'm not hiking the hips up.
And then from here, it's just a regular row, all right?
So I'm gonna feel that a lot in the obliques, especially the one on the underside.
So if I'm on my right side, that right oblique side of the core is gonna be fired up, all right?
If that is too difficult, we can always stack the feet.
So you could always
come to more of a 90 degree position and stack the legs that way.
Alright so that's just a little bit of a easier version.
But I think most of you by this time can go ahead and get into that full stack position.
So we're flat all the way from the feet through the back of the head.
Get up nice and high.
But I do think that most of you guys are probably ready to go to that flat position with the straight legs.
So try that out.
Start with a light weight as always and gradually go up.
We do want to go as heavy as we can as long as we're maintaining that posture.
If we're going so heavy that we're starting to go into rotation to pull, that's too heavy.
This is more of an anti-rotation, anti-lateral flexion exercise, so I want you to stay stable while your arm moves.
For the elastic leg kicks, I want you to think about a normal, kind of like a Frankenstein kick, except we're gonna make it a little bit more rapid and a little bit more elastic.
So I'm just gonna stay on the balls of the feet and I'm just gonna kick up my leg as high as I can, keeping that knee straight, and I'm just gonna switch every time so it ends up being a little bit of a skip.
and then a straight leg kick okay now i'm popping off the balls of the feet i do not want your heels to touch the floor and the reason why we're doing this you're not going to get a huge burn this isn't a huge workout we're trying to get some elasticity back in the post chain some elasticity in the hamstrings so a lot of people sit there and stretch or even do a normal dynamic warm-up for elasticity the thing is for a muscle to actually increase elasticity it has to be under one second
so if i'm going slow with that kick or if i'm holding a stretch it might increase what we call plasticity how flexible we get but not elasticity and elasticity is what actually translates to sprinting and jumping so everything has to be under one second and that's why we're going rapid with those kicks i want you to think about getting that leg up as quick as you can as high as you can
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for day one and day five of phase four.
So this is getting into our elasticity phase.
You'll notice that workouts are already pretty efficient.
Really try not to take out anything here.
The only time I would take anything out of these days
is if you're in season.
If you're in season, the plyometric volume might be too high.
Go back to phase one or phase two, add in some of those strength exercises and take out some of the reactive plyos.
It'll be easier on your knees.
But assuming you're in off season, get after this workout plan.
Don't skip anything.
Of course,
Always make sure that your knees feel good to go.
You don't want to push through any type of joint pain, because plyometrics can lead to significant injury if you're pushing through pain.
Could be one of the best things we do for the vertical jump, or if we push through pain and plow through it without listening to our body, it's going to cause more pain.
So you've got to be cautious here.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you could either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well so the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain we're going to focus on the hamstrings so i'm just going to sit on the roller and i'm going to cross over this foot and i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee so i'm just going to start in the center and then i'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so i can get the outside of my hamstrings
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're going to go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch i'm just going to go over with the left leg i'm going to come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back.
So it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch.
So I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can.
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm going to go five cycles, and then I'm going to switch to the other side.
Five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral, and I'm going down.
I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom.
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for my freestyle agility, I need you to get in your bag.
I just need you to get loose, all right?
So much of footwork is about rhythm, timing, and just creativity.
So you can't always be put in this box where I'm telling you to move your feet like this.
I need you to start to do it intuitively and be creative with it.
All we're going to do is just freestyle with our footwork.
For me, I like to pretend like I have a ball.
We're not going to actually do it with a ball because we move a little faster and we cut a little harder without the ball.
And so we're trying to get that actual physiological adaptation.
So I want you to do without a ball.
I like to just pretend like I have a ball, all right?
If you're not a basketball player, if you're a volleyball player, just move in different ways.
However you want to move, whatever's natural to you, freestyle.
Even if you're doing footwork patterns that you don't need for your sport, it's going to get you better, just your general human capabilities and your overall movement, which then kind of takes up that potential.
So then when you go back to the specifics of your sport, all of a sudden that becomes a lot easier.
Let's see how this looks.
So I would start at like the baseline.
I'm going to go to about half court or if you're in like a small area like a weight room, you can just do this stationary and kind of just stay in the same spot but just move around a little bit within that area.
So I'm going to do this going towards the half court.
So I'm just whatever I want to do and I'm just freestyling intuitively.
kind of get in your bag, maybe hit some different footwork combinations that you normally wouldn't hit and just get loose, freestyle, work in some different ways that's a little bit out of your comfort zone.
Maybe you go ahead and pretend like you're Kyrie Irving.
I want you to get out of your bag and enter a whole new level with this freestyle footwork.
Let's get it.
our progressive bounds i'm going to go baseline to the opposite free throw line so three quarters court it's going to be somewhere around 70 feet if you're out on a track or you're doing this on a field mark out 70 feet i think that's about 21 meters or something around there so the reason we're doing these progressive bounds this is probably the best thing that we can do for reactive plyometrics and that really translates to our quick jumps so our single leg jumps there's nothing better
for our single leg takeoff than this drill.
Better than any strength exercise you could ever do.
Now, it's very high intensity.
So if you don't have a good base of strength, you probably will end up with some overuse injuries.
This might hurt your knees a little bit.
Do not push past the point of pain.
So if you feel the knees start to hurt or the ankles or the hips or the back, any joint start to really hurt outside of just our normal muscles, stop this exercise because it is very intense.
chances are good you either have a previous injury or you're at risk for some type of overuse injury or we just don't have a good base of strength and we got to go back to phase one maybe or phase two and redo our strength phase so that we can get stronger and our muscles and tendons can be more prepared
for this high intensity plyo activity.
So on my alternating right, left, right, left, what I'm going to do is I'm trying to get off the ground as quick as I can.
I got a dorsiflex.
So I got to pull my toe up towards my head and really dorsiflex so that I can think about kind of slapping the floor with the ball of the foot.
And I'm just popping off.
I'm driving that opposite knee.
I'm going for height and I'm going for distance.
So I don't want you just getting horizontal.
I don't want you just getting vertical.
It's got to be a combination of the two where we are going for that height and we're getting distance.
But most importantly on this drill, we need a quick ground contact.
We don't want to really lower and slowly, gradually dip into our joints because then it becomes more and more muscles and less tendons.
We got to be springy and reactive off the ground.
Now, when I get to more of the single leg bounds, it becomes a little more difficult on coordination.
I do want to make sure that you're still getting off the ground quick and you're always driving that opposite knee.
So if I'm right, right, right, I got to be right, drive the left, land right, drive the left.
So I'm still driving the left every single time.
We always have to have that opposite knee drive with the opposite arm drive, whether I'm doing alternating or whether I'm doing same side bounds.
So for my double leg hurdle jumps, what I'm going to do is set up two hurdles.
They can either be high or low or just a pair of shoes.
All we need is something to mark off the jump.
So I'm setting them up at least 15 feet apart.
This first one, typically I like to go a little bit lower and the second one I like to go a little bit higher.
So get nice and relaxed, don't be tense.
If you're tense in this drill, your timing is all gonna be lost.
So you gotta be nice and relaxed and loose, get over this first one, you're gonna land, and don't get stuck in quicksand, I need you to pop off the ground.
So once we land, pop into that next step, get your feet right, get over again.
So it's always the same approach.
So if I'm starting right left, then this second one is also gonna be right left.
And then on the next rep, it's left right.
So I'm left right over the first hurdle, get my steps right, left right over the second hurdle.
So what this is doing is it's working on timing, it's working on the distance of these steps, working on rhythm.
The better we get, the shorter we can get with the hurdles.
So I want you to mess around with the length.
Start with the full 15 feet.
for the first session the next time that you do these try to shorten them up a little bit all the way to the point where we're getting over and then we're getting only one or two steps and we're getting over that next hurdle all right mix it up give yourself some variety challenge yourself with the distance let's get it
So for the barbell RDL, you could use a trap bar or if you just have dumbbells, you could hold the dumbbell right here by the top of the dumbbell.
But if you have a barbell, we're going to use that.
We're going to go about shoulder width apart or a little bit wider.
And then from there, just outside your hips, I want you to turn your hands.
So you have one palm facing that way.
You have one palm facing the other way.
From there, we're going to get down and we're going to pick the barbell up.
like it's a normal deadlift so I'm just gonna pick it up here my back stays flat alright you can kind of reset from there now
Just like on a pull through or any hip hinge, I'm gonna start with that slight bend in my knees.
So I'm not completely stiff-legged.
I'm slightly bending the knees.
Now from there, it's not a squat or it's not a normal deadlift where I continue to bend my knees.
That would be a normal deadlift.
Right now, I wanna push my hips back as far as I can without bending my knees more.
So I'm basically keeping this bar as close as I can to my body and I'm shifting the hips back
I'm gonna get to about mid shin, and then I'm coming back up.
Okay, so it's here.
Hip hinge, push the hips back, back, back, back, back, and come back up, okay?
At the bottom, you should feel a big stretch in the hamstrings, and then at the top, you should really be squeezing your glutes
if you just pitch forward, you're gonna feel a lot of it in your back.
You shouldn't feel this exercise in your back, maybe a slight burn in the back, but most of it should be the hamstrings and the glutes, okay?
Another common mistake,
is getting the barbell out too far in front you've got to really slide it right down your thighs and then right down your shins where it's almost completely touching okay now the other thing if you're good with this hip hinge in your advance let's start to think about the feet so look at my toes as i'm going down i'm lifting my toes up in the air okay so it's toes up
And then as soon as I change directions to go up, I'm pushing my toes as hard as I can into the ground.
So it's toes in and lift.
That's gonna really build that connection between my toes, my feet, and my glutes.
Okay, so on the way down, toes up, up, up, and push into the ground and stand.
So we are focusing on this as an eccentric exercise.
So I wanna go three seconds down, one second up.
So it's gonna be one,
two, three, and one second up, okay?
One, two, three, one second up.
Now, when you're digging your toes into the ground, really think about pushing that big toe as hard as you can and kind of like you're trying to crack the floor with that big toe, and then that's gonna build that connection with the glutes, okay?
Now, if this is too difficult with a barbell, step back, work on your form with a light dumbbell or even body weight.
If you're having a tough time with your hip hinge, you can always just go here with your hands and just work on getting your hips back, back, back.
All right.
The other thing is we don't need to obsess over depth.
So we don't always need to go all the way down to the floor, especially if you have bigger weights on the outside.
You're only going to be able to get the barbell to about mid shin or just below your knees.
Don't obsess with going lower than that.
The studies have shown that lower isn't always better here.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose, and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you, when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for phase five, day one and day five.
So if we have to and we're pressed for time, skip that foam roller circuit, do the dynamic warm up, do the band rapid laterals and the lateral bound one foot jump.
If you're really pressed for time, cut those down to two sets.
Skip the over speed block step and the acceleration zone jumps.
I love these for mechanics, but that is one that we could skip if we're pressed for time.
Also, if your mechanics are already really good, we may not need that as much.
It's still beneficial just to groove the pattern.
Even people with good mechanics should be continually doing drills like this, but it's way less important, especially if your mechanics are already mastered.
Moving down, we always have to do our hang high pull and our pogo box taps.
That's possibly the most important aspect of this day.
If you were really pressed for time, you could cut it down to three sets instead of four sets.
So split stance pin squat and the rhythm quarter squat, you can choose one of those.
I would like to do both with the split stance pin squat.
We're working with more heavier weights, a little bit more explosive, so we're training those fast twitch muscle fibers.
The rhythm squat is more about rhythm and coordination and stretch reflex, stretch shortening cycle.
So they're training different things, but if you're pressed for time, just choose one of them.
So you could choose the split stance pin squat and take out the rhythm quarter squat, or just take out the split stance pin squat and just do the rhythm quarter squat.
So you're supersetting it either way, whichever one you choose, you're supersetting that with the cable pull through.
We have to do that because this is our hip dominant exercise for the day.
We're really getting some good work through the glutes and through the hamstrings, so we need this exercise for the post chain.
and then we always wanna do our sub max long duration jumps.
If you're pressed for time, you could cut these down to two sets, but do make sure that you are doing that exercise.
As always, we're gonna do our 7-11 breathing.
It's only three minutes, and it gets us in that parasympathetic zone, which boosts our recovery.
The static stretch we could skip, unless you are overly tight, then you wanna do that.
Most of you guys, by now, have built a level of flexibility where we don't really need much more.
so you can skip that static stretch.
So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you could either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one, we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping, we gotta really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for my band rapid laterals, I'm gonna link together two bands.
If you only have one band, as long as it stretches pretty far, you should be fine.
So what I'm gonna do is step out, get some pretty good tension on this band, and now this is gonna be a very different movement than what you're used to.
It's a lateral, but it's not the same mechanics as a slide.
What I want to work on is a relatively stiff change of direction.
So if you look at the best change of direction athletes, they're not always lowering low and then exploding out.
They're landing with that already bent knee in its lowest position and then they're pushing out from there.
So that stiff leg landing, not completely locked out, but a slight bend in the knee is one of the best ways to change directions.
So what we're going to do is get a nice base here and then I'm just going to go here.
Stiff leg, push out.
Stiff leg, push out.
So I'm replacing this foot.
One foot is always going there in the middle, and notice my chest stays over that leg, so I'm not moving my body back and forth.
and then we just gradually build up that speed and pop off the ground as quick as you can.
It's hot lava on the outsides, we gotta get off quick.
We are gonna tilt our shoulder a little bit, so if I'm going to change direction this way, my left shoulder's gonna tilt down a little bit, and then when I'm coming this way, right shoulder's gonna tilt down a little bit, all right?
Chest is never moving, and we always have
one foot in the center.
Again, I do not want you to lock out the leg, but I also don't want you to bend low.
I want you to be somewhere in the middle where we have that slight bend in the knee and we're popping off the ground.
So for my lateral bound one foot jump, I'm going to use a normal lateral bound so this left knee is behind the right knee.
I'm loaded up in this skater position and I push out.
Now if my skills are good at absorbing that force, I can transition vertically off that one foot.
So I'm going to land and I'm going to jump and then I'm going to land and push.
jump i still need to work on getting as far as i can laterally now the hard part is transitioning from lateral to vertical all right everybody gets here and then they want to fade into that jump i need you to absorb force and transition sharp
So you're almost making like a 90 degree angle and then we go back that other way, alright?
If this is too difficult and your form is sloppy and all over the place, go back to a basic single leg change of direction bound, alright?
This is more advanced and it does take some really good absorption skills to be able to transition vertical, so don't rush it.
but if you're good and you can hit maybe three or four in a row without messing up, then you're probably at a good level and let's keep pushing.
So for my overspeed block step, we're working on the angle of that block step or that second foot contact.
So what I'm gonna do is strap together two bands, two super bands, get it around something nice and stable.
Now if you only have one band, that might be okay as long as it really stretches pretty far, but if it's very thick and strong and you can't get very far, you're not gonna have the room here.
So if that's the case, then skip this drill altogether.
Because I don't want you to run into the power rack or whatever you have it tied down to so I'm linking these two bands together.
I want you to start off with some light tension.
We don't need too much to start So start off with some light tension.
I'm just going to go into my normal jump mechanics my penultimate step arms are going back I'm going to use that turn and I'm going to work on the angle of this left foot so I'm here and
Boom, and I'm just coming up to the toes, okay?
So you'll notice as I go into that penultimate step, this band is pulling me in faster than what I'm used to.
The only way that we can stop that and decelerate that is to get that good negative shin angle.
So a lot of good jumpers have a 40 degree shin angle to the floor, whereas lower level jumpers who don't transition well have closer to a 60 or sometimes even closer to a 90 degree.
And if we have that shin angle, we go forward.
So if I were to step in like this with vertical shins,
I'm getting pulled forward.
So this band is giving me the feedback that I need to fix my mechanics naturally.
You probably don't even have to think about the angle of this.
You're naturally going to get it as long as you're using that turn.
So as you get good, we can step back a little bit and now I'm going to really add that long pin ultimate.
You see how I naturally stopped with that really good angle and that's going to help me transition vertically.
So for my acceleration zone jumps, I'm going to start in a push-up position with my hand behind the cone.
I'm going to push up as hard as I can, and I'm just going to get my foot under me, and then I'm going to push off this right foot into a bound.
So the reason we're starting in that push-up position is because when we get that foot down on the ground, we have a really steep shin angle.
So it's good for teaching acceleration, and it's good for getting us to really build up that speed.
I'm going to get that foot down, I'm going to bound out, I'm going to land on my left, I'm going to bound as far as I can, and then I'm landing right left in my jump stance.
So it's right, left, right, left, get up as high as you can.
There's two parts to this drill.
We're working on the acceleration and I want you to work on getting as far as you can.
So if you can, have a friend watch you and have them tell you where your block foot lands.
So that front foot, where is it landing?
And we want to get further and further every time.
Now, if you could film yourself, do it.
But wherever that block foot is, we want to mark it off.
So, I'm going to put a cone where my block foot is.
For me, it's around 12 to 13 feet.
So, I'm marking off at 12 feet.
If you have the measuring tape, use it.
If you don't, then just eyeball it.
Now, from there, I'm working on that block step.
So, I have all this momentum coming forward.
I got to be able to get a steep angle and get that timing of the block foot so that I can get vertical.
If you stepped in here with vertical shin angles, we fall forward.
We're probably going to cover 5 feet on that jump.
I want you to cover no more than 3 feet on that jump.
So 12 feet is where I'm taking off from.
15 feet is my goal for landing.
So I have another cone marked off at 15 feet.
So now if I hit that block the right way, I'm going to get vertical.
and I'm gonna land before that cone, all right?
So again, if you don't have the measuring tape, just eyeball it and just get as far as you can, get as high as you can, and try to cover the least amount of distance on that actual jump.
So for my hang high pull, we can either use a trap bar or a barbell.
I would prefer a trap bar.
But if you don't have a trap bar, we could use a barbell.
So I'm going to go with a hook grip.
So that means I'm bringing my thumb around the bar and then I'm bringing my finger over that thumb or some people like to go two fingers over that thumb.
That way it doesn't slip out of our hands.
So with my arm length, I like to go right around the seams.
on the barbell now a lot of you have longer arms you might want to go a little bit wider that's okay so I'm just going to deadlift it up all right now this is my base position notice I have a slight bend in the knee from there think about our RDL that we've been doing where we shift the hip backwards so I don't go down by bending my knees and if you do that by bending your knees you're actually going to
feel a little pain in your back.
So I want you to keep that initial knee bend and then from there it's just hips back.
So I'm hinging from the hips.
Once that bar gets right above knee height, I'm exploding as hard as I can and I'm just throwing this bar upwards.
like that, okay?
So I wanna end in this position.
Now, it's not a lift where we do the hinge, we come here, and then we lift with the upper body.
All of that momentum is coming from the lower body, transferring through the core into the upper body, so I need it to be fast and explosive.
So we're here, and then boom, finish high.
You finish on the toes like you're gonna take off for a jump, but your feet aren't gonna actually leave the ground.
Okay, this is a advanced exercise.
Now, if you've been Olympic lifting, you're probably familiar with brushing that bar so you can kinda hit it on the top of the thigh and pop up.
The majority of us, we don't need to worry about that right now because that's going to take a long time to learn and it's going to hurt your thighs for a while in the process.
So I'd rather you just think about getting to that good RDL position, that good hinge position, and then just exploding as hard as we can.
Only thing, if you're not going to brush and you're not going to hit the top of the thigh, I don't want you to bring the barbell out here.
I still need it to be on one line all the way up.
close to the body.
If we get it out away from the body, we're probably going to feel it more in the lower back.
We're going to decrease our power output.
Now there's a couple different options here.
After we finish, we can either just drop the barbell if you're in a gym that allows that and you have bumper plates, or you can actually catch it.
so catching it is higher stress to the body but it's also good because you get a little eccentric work on the catch so it's not a bad thing personally since i have the bumper plates i prefer to rip as hard as i can drop it and then pick it back up and go from there okay now if you have a trap bar it's going to be the same thing except slight bend in the knees hinge from the hips go all the way until your knuckles are even with your knee and then it's going to be explode from there all the way up to the toes
toss that barbell up now on the barbell we would normally finish here with the trap bar we finish here so the elbows go backwards instead of out to the side alright now if these are too advanced for you because this is you know several years of strength training before you should really be doing explosive hang high pulls if that's the case I want you to go hinge
and explode to the toes.
So it's just hinge here, explode to the toes, and then back to that slight bend in the knee, hinge, boom, explode to the toes.
You're really thinking about pulling the hips through, squeezing the glutes.
This is gonna set a good foundation and really build towards that hang high pull.
All right, let's get it.
So for my pogo box taps, what I'm gonna do is basically a normal pogo hop where I'm staying off the heels, I'm staying on the balls of the feet, I'm getting nice and springy.
It's all about short ground contact time, so I'm just springing off the ground.
Now, what I'm gonna do is it's gonna be very rapid.
I get up, I tap the box and I push back off, come down off two feet, make sure you land at the same time, pop back on, other foot goes on.
We're never fully landing on the box.
This is going to be rapid.
So we're not jumping up and landing.
I literally just want you to push back off that box, hit and spring up again.
This is going to really work on our elasticity.
Very good for making the Achilles into an energy storing and releasing monster.
That's where a lot of our athleticism is.
Again, we do not want to load up low on this specific exercise.
We want a minimal knee bend and we want to pop off nice and quick.
Make sure that we do not collapse the torso.
We got to keep the torso nice and upright.
Keep that stability through the core on this whole exercise.
I like to start at a box that's a round knee height or a little bit below or a chair or a bench or something nice and stable.
As you get better, you can raise it higher and higher and higher.
Now, we do not want to be landing or we do not want to get up on the box and have too much of a bent knee.
So if I have to get up and I have to land like this and push off, then that box is probably too high.
I want to land with almost straight knees with a little bit of a bend in my knees at the top.
like that, and then push off from there.
So don't become obsessed with the box height, just be obsessed with the quickness off the ground.
And even if you're on a low box, just think about jumping as high as you can and floating to that box instead of barely getting on the box.
Now for some of you guys your balance isn't quite to this level yet so when you start getting rapid and you start pushing off it's hard for you to get balance and go back up or at the top your balance isn't good enough to just land and push off the right amount so you're kind of stumbling on the top of the box.
If that's the case I want you just to regress and just get up and just stick on one foot and then you can just step it back down.
Or if you can, stick it on one foot and then hop down and get up, stick it on the other foot.
But again, once you pass that level, start to go more rapid with it.
So for our rhythm quarter squats, we're gonna use a barbell.
If you don't have a barbell, you could just use dumbbells, but we really want to use a barbell if possible.
We're gonna go about 50% of your one rep max.
So we're going pretty light to start.
If you feel good, we can gradually go up.
So what we're going to do is a normal barbell back squat position.
What you're going to do is you're going to get down into a quarter squat position.
So we don't want anything past 90 degrees.
We actually want to mimic the knee angle that you're going to use in a double leg takeoff.
I'm gonna get down to let's say maybe 60 to 75 degrees I'm not going all the way to 90 so I'm gonna get to that quarter squat position the easier version is just quarter squat and up the heels stay down and we're just gonna kind of bounce in that position and develop some rhythm there so I don't want you to get to the top and then rest and go again we're just getting that rhythmic
quarter squat.
So just working on that top half of the range of motion.
Now the better version, if you have the balance, we're going to come all the way up to the toes.
So it's going to be here all the way up to the toes at the top.
So you sort of go into that little calf raise and then we drop back down into that quarter squat.
All right guys, now keep in mind, it's about the load on the muscles, not the load on the bar.
So don't worry about going too heavy.
Again, start around 50% of your one rep max.
If that's too light, then you can go up.
But keep in mind, if you feel like you could jump
off the ground with the barbell then it's too light because then by not jumping we're holding back and we're not actually getting max intent so it should be a weight where you couldn't easily leave the floor all right because i do want your toes to stay down on the ground on this exercise
So for my cable pull through, we can use any normal cable machine.
I'm showing it on a Kaiser machine right now.
You don't need a Kaiser.
We just need a normal cable.
So I'm going to use the rope and I'm going to grab underhand.
So like a tricep extension, you might be used to an overhand grip.
We're actually going underhand.
So my thumbs are facing up.
and I'm grabbing that rope, stand up and step out a little bit.
We're going to go pretty wide with the feet.
Now I'm going to go slight bend in the knees and all it is is that normal RDL position.
Work on that hip hinge so it's hips back as far as we can.
Our knees don't bend anymore from there.
Hips back, back, back.
I'm loading up the hamstrings and the glutes.
And then at that bottom position, we're gonna explode up at the top.
I need you to squeeze your glutes as hard as you can and really pull the hips through.
At the top, we get a two second isometric hold.
So that means we squeeze the glutes as hard as we can.
One, two, and then we release, we go back into it.
So hip hinge, boom, explode on the way up.
Squeeze the glutes at the top, okay?
Now, if your form is good here and you're feeling it in the right places, we should really feel like we're getting a huge stretch in the hamstrings and in the glutes at the bottom position.
And then when we explode, you should feel a big burn in the glutes and a little bit in the hamstrings as well.
If we're feeling good on that, then what I want you to do is actually pull your toes up.
So as you go down, your toes are off the floor, all right?
As soon as we reverse to get up, I push my big toe down into the ground as hard as I can and I explode.
So we're trying to build that neurological connection between the big toe and the glute.
So if you're not advanced and you're just getting used to this exercise, don't worry about that aspect yet.
But, if you're good to go, then start to slam that toe into the ground on the way up, squeeze at the top.
This is a very good exercise for the post chain, glutes, hamstring, training that hip hinge and improving our velocity on the hip extension, which is essential for the vertical jump.
So for my sub max long duration jumps, what I'm gonna do is almost like a jump rope.
So you know in a jump rope, we're just nice and low and we're rhythmic and we're bouncy.
We're not going maximal on this and we're also not lowering low and trying to use a lot of muscular power.
We're really just using for the most part that Achilles to spring us off the ground.
So there's gonna be three different aspects here.
So your first one is gonna be a side to side hop.
Okay, I'm springing off the balls of the feet.
I am not letting my heel collapse down to the ground, all right?
We're not going maximal, we're just going light and bouncy off the ground, okay?
Now I'm going for a certain amount of time.
Pay attention to the reps because we're going to go up every week.
So let's say for week one, you're 30 seconds.
Okay, now the second one is gonna be front back.
So I'm just switching the feet
forwards and backwards same concept springing off the balls of the feet not letting that heel collapse let's say it's 30 seconds there so then the third one is just a normal low level jump same thing spring off the ball of the foot heel cannot collapse okay now
What we're gonna do is really go long duration.
You're gonna get a big burn in the calves, but what we're doing is we're reforming the fascia of our feet and we're training that Achilles to be an energy storing and releasing monster.
So pay attention to the reps.
This is one exercise where I do want you close to your max.
So let's say week one, I gave you 30, 30, 30.
That's a minute and a half total.
If you got to the end of that minute and a half and you feel like you could have kept going,
you need to keep going.
You need to push close to your max because if we want the fascia to actually reform around the feet and we want the Achilles to adapt, we gotta push close to that max.
So for some of you, that might be two minutes, that might be three minutes.
I just need you to progressively increase each week.
So if I were to do this drill right now, I would probably get about three minutes and at that three minute mark, personally,
I would start to feel like almost like a cramp in the calf.
I would feel a burn of like a nine out of 10.
I don't need you to get to a 10 out of 10.
I don't need your calves to fully cramp up, but get close to that point and then stop.
Take as long as you want.
Sometimes I take up to two or three minutes in between sets and then I go back in.
For most of you, I want you to follow the rep range, but again, if that is too easy, extend it, make sure you jot down your time, and each week I want you to go up on that.
By the end of the four weeks, our fascia and our achilles is gonna be a lot springier.
We're gonna be storing and releasing elastic energy like never before.
Let's get it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
okay so i'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill all right so it's in through the nose and i want to make sure that my stomach is rising okay your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
And I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm going to pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull
this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right, so I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically gonna do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm gonna push back like this.
I'm gonna straighten out my arms.
And now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee.
So we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius.
That's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys?
Minimum dose advice for day two and day four of phase five.
Really there is no minimum dose advice for this workout as you see.
It's extremely short, extremely fast.
There are some days in our workouts where we're going to go short and light and efficient because we can't just beat the body up
all year round.
Sometimes we have to have those days that are actually a little bit lighter than previous phases.
So you'll notice that there's no mobility.
You should have built all the mobility by now if that's not the case and add in some mobility drills from the earlier phases.
But most of you guys have built enough mobility, so we're not super setting anything there.
So you can pretty much do this workout as is the leg climb.
You're going to get a good burn.
You could increase the reps if you don't feel a big burn, but you really should.
Feel it burn in the front core.
Hand walkout is not really a big burning exercise, but it is fatiguing overall.
It's full body stability, so that is pretty tiring.
Da Vinci plank, the way we make that harder is we always just load up more and more and more, so we never want to increase reps.
We don't want to hold for longer.
We just want to see how much total weight we can hold in that 30 second time frame with perfect form.
and then that cable drop step rotation, same thing, the reps are pretty low, so we can progressively overload by increasing the amount of weight we use.
So for my leg climbs, I'm going to go down on my back.
I'm going to make sure that my back is nice and flat.
I'm going to go about six inches off the ground with this left leg.
And then I'm going to go straight up 90 degree angle with that right leg.
Some of you will be a little less.
That's okay.
All right.
So what I'm going to do is three grabs to the leg.
So it's going to be left, right, left.
All right.
Left, right, left.
left and i'm not really grabbing and pulling on my leg much i'm just doing this so that i can really control that contraction from the abs all right so left right left and come back down left right left and come back down so this is really isolating the abs we're also getting a very good
hamstring stretch, and for some of you it'll be an opposite hip flexor stretch because when we're in that 90 degree angle, a lot of you guys like to lift that leg.
So we're getting hip flexor, we're getting hamstring, and then you're gonna feel we're gonna get a huge abdominal contraction.
Let's do it.
So for my hand walkouts, I'm gonna go wrist directly underneath the shoulder, knees directly underneath the hips, and then I'm just pushing up a couple inches so my knees are off the ground.
I'm gonna keep my torso nice and flat, and I'm just gonna step forward a couple inches with the hands every time.
Now for some of you,
You might only be able to get about right there, and then you walk it back.
That counts as one rep.
The better you get, the further out you can actually get the hands.
I don't want you to get so far that you start to hyperextend from the lower back.
I want you to go to that point where you can still stay flat from the back.
You can feel a good burn in the core, but you're not quite losing that position, all right?
Should feel this a lot in the front abs, a little bit in the obliques, a little bit in the low back.
Of course, we're going to feel a lot in the shoulders because we're getting a lot of shoulder stability.
This is going to be a full body stability exercise.
You should feel a little bit of a burn in the core.
If you feel it more in your lower back, then you're probably doing something wrong and you'll want to regress this to a normal plank.
So for the DaVinci plank, I'm gonna use a cable machine.
If you don't have a cable machine, we could use a band.
And if you don't have a band, then we're gonna go with this side plank with a leg raise, which I'll show in a second.
But if we have that cable machine, right now I'm going on 100 pounds because I've been doing this for a long time.
I would really say start very light.
Start all the way at 30 pounds.
Try it out, see how it feels.
If it's easy, then go up and up and up until we can find that perfect weight.
But so I'm going to set this up where the cable is in line with my mid chest.
Now I'm just going to step out.
I'm going to pick it up.
take a step out I'm in this wide stance my chest is right over my pelvis so I'm not leaning shoulders nice and flat now from there I'm gonna lift up this outside foot so I'm gonna lift up my left leg about an inch off the ground and I'm just stabilizing so I got to stabilize with this right leg but more importantly this left side of the core right now is fired up and I'm going left arm out
My shoulders should be completely flat.
Most of you naturally will be here.
I need you to fight with that core to get your shoulders flat.
And we're holding, we're feeling that in the left oblique.
We'll feel it a little bit in the right oblique and the core as well.
But mostly on that left side of the core.
And then after we're done, make sure that you walk it back in.
Don't just let it pull you back in, of course.
So if we don't have the cable machine, we could use a band.
I'm using a one inch perform better band, hook it up to a tree or to a power rack or something nice and stable.
I'm going to pull out
as far as I can really to get some really good tension on that.
And then I'm going to pull that right foot up.
Of course, that outside foot is always the one that comes up.
Other arm straight out and I'm just holding in that position.
So that's actually not enough tension.
I'd have to go a little further and then from there pull up and I'm not letting that band pull me in.
So I'm staying nice and strong with that right oblique and I'm flat with the shoulders.
I'm consciously squeezing the core in this position for the full duration of the set.
Now, if you don't have the cable or the band, then you're just gonna go in a side plank position, and you're gonna get nice and flat.
So option one is bent knees, stack them together, stack the legs, get nice and flat here, and then we're just gonna lift this leg, stay nice and flat through that knee all the way through the shoulder.
I'm feeling that on the inside, so I'm feeling that on the right side of the core.
I'm gonna feel that in the hips here.
I'm gonna feel that in my right hip as well.
I can just get this other arm.
and hang out in this position, nice and strong and stable.
If that is too easy, then go straight leg, and we're up nice and flat from the feet all the way through the shoulders, squeeze that core, and then we're just gonna lift here and other hand up, all right?
Okay, for the cable drop step rotation, I'm just going to use a cable, start light and build up gradually, or if you don't have a cable, you could use a band.
I'm going to interlock my fingers over the handle and just step it out just a little bit, all right?
We're going to come into a quarter squat position.
Now to open up that way, I got to drive off the right foot.
I'm going to open up and I'm going to get that left foot down so that that toe is pointing that way.
All right.
I don't want you to go into rotation until that foot is down.
So I'm here, I push into position, and then from here I can open up and explode there.
Now on the way back, I'm coming halfway, hands right in front of the chest, fire up that core, two to three seconds, and then release back to the start.
So it's foot down, explode, come back, hold.
and release.
So the reason that I want you to not just go into rotation but get the foot down first is we're then going to work that kind of recoil core, we're going to work as the full fascia system instead of just muscular power.
So we're getting here and then we get a good recoil through the core and we get here and then coming back we get that pause and then release.
do the desired reps to one side, and then go back and do the desired reps to the other side.
We should feel a burn through the core, especially the side in the obliques.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for phase five, day three.
So if we're pressed for time, take out that foam roller circuit, do the dynamic warm up, do the band deceleration, take out the back pedal deceleration.
Do the angled cone bounds, if you want to take that down to two sets you can.
Do the rotational hurdle jumps, if you have the time, you can take that down to two sets as well.
Take out the one leg jump,
Still do the one foot approach jump.
We still got to rep out those one foot mechanics.
Do the one leg RDL swings.
It's already very low rep.
We're only doing a couple reps on each side.
Do the single leg broad hop to vertical hop.
If you want to take down the reps from four to two, you can do that.
So still do your four sets.
but keep it down at around two reps each side.
If you have time, do the hyperextension hold plate drop.
It's good to go back to an exercise that we've done before and be able to progressively overload so we can now get a harder squeeze in that post chain.
We can use a heavier weight than we're doing back when we did these in phase one.
So if you can do that, if you had to take it down to two sets, that's okay.
If you have to skip the sub max long duration jumps, you can do that because we're already doing it in Monday, Friday.
I really recommend that you get that in.
But of course, if we are pressed for time or our volume on the court is so high that we have to decrease our volume here, that is one exercise that you could take out.
As always, do our 7-Eleven breathing.
and then we don't even have a static stretch in here.
So if you need the static stretch because you're overly tight, you can always add it in at the end of your workout.
Most of you guys probably don't need it.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we can cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one and if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee then start here and finish and then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one is going to be for the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day.
We're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary, just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're gonna go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch i'm just gonna go over with the left leg i'm gonna come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid-shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one two
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
All right.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for my band decelerations, if you have one band that should be okay as long as it stretches pretty far, you're just gonna have to watch out and make sure you don't run into the power rack or whatever you have it tied down to.
I personally like to link together two bands so I have a little bit more distance to work with.
So I'm gonna pull it out.
I'm gonna get some pretty good tension on it, all right?
So now I'm just gonna go into a deceleration.
It's like I'm driving one way, I'm planning that right leg, stopping on a dime, absorbing, and then I'm pushing back, okay?
And then I go the other way.
The footwork is right, left, right,
left, right, left, okay?
So it's almost just like a foot replacement.
So it's gonna be here, push back here, push back here, push back here, all right?
I'm just changing directions as sharp as I can, nice and rapid off the ground.
This is really going to train our ability to decelerate linearly, create space, pull back, get open shots, create for your teammates.
Deceleration is just as important, if not more,
important than explosive acceleration.
Let's get it.
So for my angled cone bounds, what I'm gonna do is set up six cones, or if you only have three cones, you could set up three and then switch them for the other side.
Or if you don't have cones at all, you could just use shoes or anything just to mark off a spot, give yourself a goal to aim for.
I'm gonna go in the middle and I'm gonna aim here.
So I'm starting on my right foot.
I'm gonna go with my left foot so I bound forward and I push back.
I need that to be quick.
Use the floor as a springboard, bounce off, do not sink into quicksand.
So it's here.
push back, once I get back to that middle, I gotta get balance on one foot and get vertical, so jump as high as you can, all right?
So it's here, here, jump, land, boom, get out to that side, land, and then get to the back, open up, so you can see how I'm pointing the toe out, I'm getting that little rotation.
boom, push back, and jump, stick on one foot, and then I go to the other side.
So it's here, left foot jump, here, left foot jump, here, left foot jump, okay?
We're really working on those angled cuts, getting explosive multi-directionally, and then always getting back to the middle
getting balanced and getting straight up and down.
Now the most common mistake that I see on this drill is people get back to the middle and then they fade off to the side on their jump, all right?
I need you to decelerate and get straight up, straight down, come right back down and then be explosive, push out.
Half the battle is force absorption and becoming balanced before we re-accelerate.
Let's work on that, let's get to the next level.
So for my rotational hurdle jump, I'm going to have a hurdle in the middle.
I'm going to have two small hurdles on the outside.
Of course, if you're going to have the big hurdle, it doesn't matter.
All we need is maybe a little hurdle, a shoe, a cone, doesn't really matter.
So what I want to do is I want to set this up to where if I'm standing in the middle, I want to push out laterally and I have to really put some force in the ground.
So I don't want you to be able to just step over.
I want you to have to push out.
push out laterally and then as soon as this foot lands you got to transition quick as you can like it's hot lava get back over that cone add a little rotation to it and then I'm stepping in left right so then it's a left right regular takeoff over that hurdle now I'm gonna land on this other side now I got to go rotationally so I got to go here boom
boom okay so I'm always open to this side so I land here I get here push now it's right left get over okay now of course I land here boom open this way so now it's right left right all right this is kind of confusing to start
Once you get in a groove, you're going to start to feel that rhythm.
It's going to feel nice and smooth.
We're going to build that versatile jumping style where we can step in left-right, right-left, off a lateral, off a spin.
It doesn't matter.
We get to that max vert either way.
Let's get it.
So for my one leg RDL swing, what I'm going to do is hold two dumbbells by my side, come to an RDL position.
So that's one leg, slight bend in the knee, of course, from there it's a hip hinge.
We're not going down with the knee.
Once I get down to that bottom position, which right now is going to be hands past the knee, so the dumbbells are going to be about mid shin for most of us.
If you're a little more tight, it's okay to just go down to your knees.
So I'm gonna get down to that position and then I'm gonna aggressively swing as fast as I can.
I'm gonna keep my elbow straight and I'm gonna swing the dumbbells up over my head.
I'm gonna bring it down while I'm still on one leg to challenge our stability and then bring that other foot down, bring the dumbbells back down, okay?
So it's slight bend.
RDL as fast as we can, explode up to that top position.
Do not think about doing an RDL and then a lift with the arms.
The arms are just swinging from the momentum of that aggressive explosive hip extension, okay?
So it's here, swing them, stabilize at the top, bring it down, come all the way down.
Now, this is a very advanced exercise, so if you don't have the stability to do it on one leg, I'd rather you come to a split stance.
So, if you did it in a split stance, we would be here in a little baby split.
My feet have to be pretty narrow.
I can't be very wide, otherwise I'm going to hit the dumbbell on my leg.
Here, baby split.
From there, it's a hip hinge.
Notice I'm on the ball of the foot.
I'm not on my heel on that back leg, but I am on my heel on the front leg.
So it's gonna be here and then boom, explode.
Come back down and reset.
Boom.
explode, come back down, reset.
Now, if you're going to do that single leg RDL, start very light, start 5 or 10 pound dumbbells in each hand.
Once you're good to go, then you can start to go up.
Most of our athletes don't get past 20 pounds.
20 pounds is a pretty good weight as far as really just utilizing that hip extension velocity, hamstring and glute, instead of using the arms.
If you start to get too heavy, you're gonna feel like you're really working your arms to lift, alright?
So, start light, gradually go up, let's get it.
So for my single leg broad hop to vertical hop, what I'm going to do is set up a cone as far as I can away from my hurdle.
Now, if you don't have the high hurdle, that's okay.
You can always use a low hurdle or just a shoe or some sort of marker to know what you're getting over.
Doesn't necessarily have to be a high hurdle, but I'm going to set up here and I'm going to balance on one leg, same
position as our single leg rdl so we hinge from the hips we throw our arms back our torso goes down towards the floor so i end up almost parallel to the torso with that chest and then i swing this leg and i explode as far as i can and i land on that same leg so it's a broad hop
Alright, so boom, get as far as I can and then it's a reactive vertical jump.
So as soon as you land, I don't want you to sink low and get up.
I want you to boom, get off the floor nice and reactive.
Get over the hurdle and then either land on two feet or land one, two.
Okay, so I need you to get as far as you possibly can with that first one, and the further we can set that cone back, the better, and then the higher we get on the single leg vertical hop, the better.
So here we have a couple options.
If you have the hyperextension machine like this, then we're going to do hyperextension holds with the plate drop.
If you do not have this, then we're just going to get two benches or two boxes and we're going to do a reverse plank.
We're working the same muscles.
So if you don't have this, don't worry.
But if you do have the hyperextension machine, I would start light.
I would start with maybe a 10 or 25 pound plate at the most.
and we're just going to come in and hold in this full extension okay so for hyperextension machine doesn't really mean that we want to go into hyperextension we just want full extension where i'm flat all the way from my head down through the heel okay and contrary to popular belief this isn't really a back exercise this is actually glutes and hamstrings okay so
If you're very inexperienced and you have no strength in the post chain and the glutes, then you can just hold right here.
You can just hold for about 30 seconds.
That's going to get you a good workout.
If you've been training for a while, maybe for a couple of years, then you can do the plate drop.
So I'm going to hold right here and I'm just going to drop the plate and catch it at full extension.
So it's drop, catch, bring it back up.
Drop, catch, bring it back up.
So every time that I'm dropping the plate and going to catch it, it gives what's called a perturbation.
So it's forcing me down into flexion, but my glutes and my hamstrings are resisting that flexion.
So they're resisting that perturbation, and that's what gets the hamstrings and the glutes and the post chain nice and strong.
So for this, how you count the reps, every time you drop the plate, catch it, and bring it back up, that counts as one rep.
Now, if that's too easy, then yes, you can go up to a 35-pound plate or a 45-pound plate, but for the most part, I would rather see you have just perfect form, stay completely in that full extension, and really just squeeze the boots as hard as you can.
We've never had anybody go above a 45-pound plate because if you're doing this the right way, you're going to really feel that burn in the post chain.
So for my sub max long duration jumps, what I'm gonna do is almost like a jump rope.
So you know in a jump rope, we're just nice and low and we're rhythmic and we're bouncy.
We're not going maximal on this and we're also not lowering low and trying to use a lot of muscular power.
We're really just using for the most part that Achilles to spring us off the ground.
So there's gonna be three different aspects here.
So your first one is gonna be a side to side hop.
Okay, I'm springing off the balls of the feet.
I am not letting my heel collapse down to the ground, all right?
We're not going maximal, we're just going light and bouncy off the ground, okay?
Now I'm going for a certain amount of time.
Pay attention to the reps because we're going to go up every week.
So let's say for week one, you're 30 seconds.
Okay, now the second one is gonna be front back.
So I'm just switching the feet
forwards and backwards same concept springing off the balls of the feet not letting that heel collapse let's say it's 30 seconds there so then the third one is just a normal low level jump same thing spring off the ball of the foot heel cannot collapse okay now
What we're gonna do is really go long duration.
You're gonna get a big burn in the calves, but what we're doing is we're reforming the fascia of our feet and we're training that Achilles to be an energy storing and releasing monster.
So pay attention to the reps.
This is one exercise where I do want you close to your max.
So let's say week one, I gave you 30, 30, 30.
That's a minute and a half total.
If you got to the end of that minute and a half and you feel like you could have kept going,
you need to keep going you need to push close to your max because if we want the fascia to actually reform around the feet and we want the Achilles to adapt we got to push close to that max so for some of you that might be two minutes that might be three minutes I just need you to progressively increase each week so if I were to do this drill right now I would probably get about three minutes and at that three minute mark personally
I would start to feel like almost a cramp in the calf.
I would feel a burn of like a 9 out of 10.
I don't need you to get to a 10 out of 10.
I don't need your calves to fully cramp up, but get close to that point and then stop.
Take as long as you want.
Sometimes I take up to two or three minutes in between sets and then I go back in.
For most of you, I want you to follow the rep range, but again, if that is too easy, extend it, make sure you jot down your time, and each week, I want you to go up on that.
By the end of the four weeks, our fascia and our Achilles is gonna be a lot springier.
We're gonna be storing and releasing elastic energy like never before.
Let's get it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
What's up guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day three of phase six.
This is already a very efficient workout so we shouldn't have to cut out much.
If we're going to cut out anything, it would be the foam roller circuit and it would be the last exercise, hamstring chair alternating holds.
This is a great exercise.
You can get sort of a maximal muscle contraction in the hamstrings, get a good mind muscle connection to those hamstrings.
but if there's one that you have to skip, it would be that one.
All the other exercises are extremely important.
The oscillating ankle stiffness, you could take that down to two or three sets, but this is a very important exercise, so I wouldn't completely skip that exercise.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You could do long or you could do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you could just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you could either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one, we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
the next one we're going to do is the calves so we're just going to cross over and i'm going to push myself up so my hips are off the ground and i'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle so we're going over that calf and also over that achilles and our next one we're flipping over we're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad so i'm going to go on the side of the roller now and i'm just going to come down into a plank position and i'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I want to stay on the ball of the foot.
And I'm just going to go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here, maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed.
So we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can.
But we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back.
So it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch.
So I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for our top end speed workout, we're going to keep it very efficient and simple.
The reason why we're doing this is top end sprint speed exposes the body to a lot of things that we don't get anywhere else, right?
Like building the proper stiffness through the Achilles and through the quad tendon and the proper compliance through the hip flexor tendons.
And it kind of builds the tendons exactly how the human body was meant to be.
And we can't get that through doing basic mobility, basic static stretching.
And also the ground contact times are so fast that we have to learn how to apply force quicker and quicker and quicker.
And so we're not just getting faster when we work on top end sprint speed.
We're also going to improve our vertical jump, especially off one leg because the ground contact time is so short.
Now, if you're on a track, basically mark out 54 meters.
I do 54 meters because it's about a quart and a half, and so that's what I have our guys do, and they've got some pretty good results off that.
So mark out 54 feet, and then halfway put another cone.
All right, so you have a cone here, you have a cone halfway, and then you have a cone at that 54 meters.
So for this phase, we have six sprints.
All right, so it's six sets of one with a break in between.
For the first one, I want you to accelerate at 50%.
So start split stance and you're just going to accelerate at 50%.
Once you hit the cone, you're going to then accelerate to 75%.
So we're not all out yet.
All the way through that 54 meters, walk it back nice and slow.
Take a minute, take as long as you need.
Once you feel good to go,
we're back in for that second set now we're accelerating at 75 percent and then i want you to once you hit the that first cone go up to 90 percent all right walk it back now the next one i want you to accelerate at 90 percent once you hit the first cone
boost it up to a hundred percent so that's the first one where we're all out walking back the last three are a hundred percent all the way through if you have a friend keep time try to beat your time all three reps because we need max intent i need you going as fast as you possibly can week after week we should be decreasing our sprint time
Now, if you cannot get it on a track, I really advise trying to find somewhere where you have that long distance because if you have to do this on a basketball court, that's okay, but you can't reach true top-end speed on a basketball court, right?
By the time we get out of acceleration and we start to raise up into that top-end speed, we're already almost getting to that baseline.
So we already have to decelerate and change directions.
and so that's a huge thing in basketball and volleyball we never are exposed to top end speed because everything is acceleration but like i said it's so beneficial to train top end speed because it translates to other qualities such as single leg jumping so
I really advise trying to find the space.
If you have to do it on a basketball court, then go ahead and just accelerate early and try to get as fast as we can early on and sprint through the baseline, walk it back.
You can go up to 10 sets instead of just doing six sets.
So for our bound two foot takeoff combo, first of all, I'm going for distance and height.
So if you're doing it on a basketball court, I would start just inside the high school three point line, heels on the line.
I'm going to start with a broad jump.
All right.
So I'm rocking the arms back.
I'm getting a good torso angle.
I'm jumping as far forward.
Now, instead of landing on two, I'm going to land on one and I'm going to stay stiff with that foot and spring into that next bound.
So I'm going to jump.
I'm going to land right, and then I'm going to jump to my left, and from my left, I get straight into my penultimate step, so then it's right, left, take off.
All right, so we're building a ton of explosiveness, stiffness, reactive strength.
Most importantly, we're building that rhythm into the two-foot takeoff.
So it would be as far as I can, right, left, right, left, take off.
Off this left foot, I don't want you to think about a bound where you're getting as far as you can.
I just want you to get a little bit of distance and kind of build that rhythm into that long penultimate stride.
If you're doing it on the court, the further out we can get, the better.
So if I'm good there and I can get up and, you know, say you can only touch the backboard, if you can get up and touch the backboard, then okay, cool, let's move it back.
Let's go NBA three and then let's move it back a couple feet.
If you can get back close to the circle at the half court line, that's pretty impressive, all right?
I do want you to get max jump height, though, so I need you to touch as high as you can.
Let's say you can already touch the rim.
You need to do this with a basketball, all right?
And I need you to get up there and throw down some dunks, try some different dunks that you've never worked on before, and let's try to really push ourselves to get that max jump height.
So, of course, we're going to switch sides on this.
So if I said three sets of two, that means two broad right, left, right,
two of those and then two on the other side to complete one set.
So then the other side would be just the opposite.
So it would be off two, land left, right, left, right, turn stance that way, get up probably left hand.
On the lateral double bound, we're focusing on our lateral power, speed, and elasticity.
So we're gonna start on the right foot here.
I'm gonna go right, right, left.
So I'm gonna jump off my right, land on my right, push again, land on my left.
And now when I land on my left, I change directions as quick as I possibly can and go to my right.
So now it's gonna be left, left, right.
So left, left, right, transition.
Right, right, left, transition.
Notice I'm using minimal knee bends.
So I'm staying relatively stiff on the transition portion.
I'm not going to land and sink into the joints.
The quickest cuts, the quickest moves on the basketball court are done with relatively stiff joints.
We hit the floor and we get out.
So think about this.
Visualize a game scenario while we're doing this drill.
So it's right, right, left.
Notice that my body is already leaning in that position.
If you land in this position, we're not going to be able to cut that way.
Okay, so I got to set myself up for my next cut with that body lean.
So for my consecutive hurdle jumps, I'm gonna put out three hurdles.
Now, I have the adjustable hurdles so that I can adjust them to different heights.
It's from Champion Sports, so if you hit it, it just collapses.
You don't trip over it.
If you don't have these hurdles, that's completely fine.
I don't really care what you have.
You could have the tiny little agility hurdles
or you could even put out three cones or just three shoes, whatever you want to use, it doesn't really matter.
All that matters is that we have an object to jump over.
At the end of the day, your max intent and your max jump height matters.
The object that we're jumping over doesn't matter at all.
But I want you to put out three objects and make sure that they're about six feet apart.
If they're too narrow, then you're going to have a hard time with this drill.
Everybody's different.
Everybody has different length.
And so some of you might have to go even further, kind of try it out for me.
I like to go about six feet.
So what I'm going to do is my first one is a double hop.
So that means I jump over the first one.
Now, when I land in the middle,
I'm gonna go with a double hop, so I'm not reactive off the ground just yet.
So I'm gonna land, and it's one, two, and get up.
So you see that little baby hop?
I'm landing, and then I'm jumping again, all right?
I land in the center, I do the same thing.
So it's land, baby hop, jump, land on the other side, all right?
So that is level one.
So for our first two sets, we're doing level one, double jump.
Now, level two, which is for you going to be sets three and four, you're going to do a more reactive jump, but we're still not going stiff with the knees.
So a lot of you have probably done more of a pogo hop type jump where it's very stiff with the knees, very little range of motion.
For this one, I want you to load up pretty low, but I still want you to get off the floor fast.
So we jump.
We land and we load up low and get up high.
Same thing on the next hurdle.
We load up low, we get up high.
I do want you getting off the floor fast, but I still want you getting a big range of motion.
This is working what we call the slow stretch reflex.
compared to the fast stretch reflex, which is going to be level three.
The fast stretch reflex, now we're getting over that first hurdle and we literally just tap the floor and get off as high as we can.
So it's minimal bend in the knees, we're nice and stiff with the ankles.
As soon as you hit, we're reactive off the ground and bounce.
It's like more of a pogo hop than a normal jump.
Get over that second hurdle, same thing, pogo hop, get over that third hurdle and land nice and soft.
So set one and set two, double hop.
Set three and set four are land low, get high.
Set five and set six are reactive, quick off the ground, minimal knee bend, more of a pogo hop type jump.
So for my oscillating ankle stiffness, what I'm going to do is use a bumper plate or a nice stable step of some sort.
Now if you have a Smith machine, you could do this with a Smith machine.
I wouldn't do this with a regular barbell because of the stability and kind of the angle that we're in.
I like to do it with dumbbells personally.
So if that's the case and you want to do it with dumbbells, hold the heaviest dumbbells that you can hold.
So right now I'm just using a 50.
Normally I'd probably use around 75s.
So what we're going to do is bring the ball of the foot up on that bumper plate and then I'm in a big split stance.
This back leg is going to stay relatively straight.
We can bend that knee a little bit if it's more comfortable.
Now from here, I'm just oscillating.
So I'm just here in my lunge and I'm just bouncing
up and down, but notice my heel is not collapsing.
So every time I drop down, my heel wants to collapse lower than the plate.
I got to keep it stable and keep it even with the plate.
So I'm just bouncing in this position.
All right.
We're going to feel a huge burn through the feet, through the calves, all the way up through the glutes and the quads.
We are going for time.
So set the timer so that you don't have to worry about counting reps.
and we're just bouncing in this position.
We don't want a long, slow eccentric.
So don't slowly lower yourself down.
Explode up, lower.
Explode up, lower.
And we're just oscillating in maybe a three to four inch range.
We're not standing up all the way to the top.
So this is great for our traditional oscillating that we've been doing, glutes, quads, hamstrings, all that.
But the reason that we're doing this with an elevated foot is to work on that ankle stiffness.
So when we look at an approach jump, that block foot, we need rigidity, we need stiffness.
Otherwise that heel collapses and we lose all of that elastic energy through the Achilles.
sprinting, same thing.
If we're hitting that heel collapse, we're losing a lot of that energy, so we need proper ankle stiffness to run, to cut, and to jump to our highest potential.
Let's do it.
So for my hamstring chair alternating holds, I'm gonna use a box, a bench, or a chair, or even just the end of your couch.
What we're gonna do is come to our back, and I wanna get 90-90.
So I'm gonna put my heels up on the box or the bench or the couch,
and I wanna get 90 degrees here, and I want 90 degrees here, okay?
Now from that position, and if we can't get that, we might have to elevate your feet more, maybe use some pillows to elevate your feet more, or maybe you need to elevate your torso more, so maybe lay down on some pillows, mess around with that distance and that height to where we can get 90 degrees here, 90 degrees here.
Now from this position, I'm just gonna bridge up
and then I'm gonna come to one leg.
So I'm gonna give a three count, so I'm gonna lift my left leg,
One, two, three, and then I'm gonna switch.
Now I'm driving my left heel down into the bench, and I'm lifting my right leg.
One, two, three, okay?
That counts as one rep, and I just keep alternating, all right?
The key here is we're holding ourselves up with our hamstrings, so we should feel that burn back in the hamstrings, but I want you to exaggerate it and get a maximal isometric hold, so that means I'm not just
putting enough tension in the hamstrings to hold myself up, I'm actually squeezing as hard as I can, and I'm pushing down into the box as hard as I can.
So I'm getting a maximal hamstring hold, and then I switch.
Maximal tension, push the heel as hard as you can down into the box,
and then switch.
So if you do these the right way, by the end of the set, you're gonna feel a huge burn in the hamstring, almost to the point where you feel like you're gonna cramp.
So we're getting some good isolation back in the hamstrings.
We're getting that post chain strength.
A lot of times, athletes weakest link is that post chain, and a lot of athletes train their quads a lot, but their hamstrings are not quite as strong.
It's a very good exercise for balancing out the hamstrings and the quads.
Let's get after it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you, when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down to the elbows and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off, and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor, that's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day two and day four of phase six.
So it's already very efficient.
You honestly probably don't have to take anything out.
I think we could get this done in 20 or 30 minutes.
Side plank hip abduction.
Great exercise.
You're actually going to feel this a lot more in the hip abductors side of the hips, which is good.
It's nice to get a little bit of a pump in there.
You're also going to feel that in the core as well, so a little bit of full body stability there.
The PRI floss.
So if you're extremely flexible already, you probably don't need this, but this is also working on breathing patterns, so it is a very valuable exercise.
So I'd recommend doing that.
Rocking dead bug, very valuable exercise.
Rotational rolling mobility.
This is challenging kind of internal rotators, external rotators, core stability in a way that we haven't really done much of in the past.
Even if you're already mobile, I'd recommend trying out this exercise.
It's going to challenge your mobility in some different planes than we're used to.
Leg lowers, great exercise.
If you want to make it harder, we can go slower on the way down and build more tension through the core.
lower back angels.
We haven't done much erector spinae isolation.
Those are the back muscles.
We haven't done much isolation there.
So even though this is a pretty easy exercise, at least it seems like it, you might get a pretty good burn in those erector muscles that run along the spine.
So I would recommend doing this.
If you have any type of back pain or you're prone to back pain, this is one that could flare it up a little bit.
If that's the case and you feel any pain, skip this exercise, but it is very good for injury prevention long term.
Let's do it.
So for my side plank hip abduction, I'm gonna go ahead and stack my legs, 90 degree angle there with the knees, and then I'm gonna come down on that forearm.
So I don't want you on the elbow, I don't want you on the wrist, I want your full forearm down on the ground.
I'm going to make sure that I'm nice and flat through the body so I don't want to have a major tucked hip there.
I want to be extended nice and flat.
Now from there, I'm just lifting my hips off the ground and then I'm going to drive this leg at the same time.
So I'm up.
I'm driving that leg at the top and then I'm right back down.
Bring your hip all the way back down to the ground.
Torso is still off the floor but that hip will touch down.
So it's here, hip touches down, your full thigh is on the ground and drive up off that.
So you're gonna feel a lot of this on that leg that's down.
You're gonna feel that through the lateral portion of the hip.
So we're working that hip abduction, but then you're also gonna feel it through that oblique that's down as well.
So if my right side is down, as I'm pushing up, I'm gonna feel it from here all the way up through that lateral aspect of the core.
So if you did wanna make this a little bit more difficult,
Stay in that same position and you could add a band, a mini band right above the knees.
Not necessarily essential.
Even our NBA players have a tough time with this because if you're getting the perfect form and you're getting the hips to light up in the areas that we want, we're training a lot of those smaller stabilizing muscles.
And so this is actually pretty tough.
But if this does feel way too easy and you don't feel any of a burn in that lateral aspect of the hip, then you can add the band.
or if you're super advanced you could start to go with just full straight legs and then you're coming down and driving like that come down touch and drive all right but that's a pretty difficult variation most of you are going to be better off with that 90 degrees stacked legs
So this mobility drill is a concept from PRI.
So I want you to pay attention to your breathing patterns here, not just the stretch itself.
So get a foam roller or get a pillow or get something that you can prop your knee up on.
And I'm going to actively push down throughout the entire set.
So I'm pushing down in this right leg.
I'm bringing this left leg back a little past 90 degrees.
and I'm keeping my back grounded, so I don't want a big arch back.
I'm thinking about posteriorly tilting my pelvis, so that means I'm tucking my tail so that my back is nice and flat.
Now from here, actively apply pressure downwards, and I'm just going to extend
and come back extend and come back but I want you to pay attention to the breathing so when you go into extension I want you to breathe in so I want you to get air all the way down into your stomach when we come back into flexion I want you to breathe out and when we breathe out we're thinking about bringing our rib cage down so it's in you can either go through the nose or through the mouth I don't really care so I'm going through the nose so it's in
and out, push the ribs down.
All right, now with every rep, you want to try to get your knee into more and more extension, get that full range of motion.
Remember to apply active pressure down through that foam roller the entire time.
Then of course, once we finish the recommended reps on one side, we switch over to that other side.
So for my rocking dead bug, I'm gonna use a basketball, volleyball, or any type of ball around this size.
If you don't have that, that's okay.
So I'm gonna pin it between my knee and my elbow, all right?
Now if I don't have the ball, then I'm just gonna try to touch elbow to knee.
It's actually gonna be a little bit more difficult, a little more hip range of motion.
So if I have that ball, I'm going to pin it, lay your head back.
I want to make sure that I'm not hyperextended in my back.
So a lot of people come into this extension where if you slip your hand under there, there's a big space.
I want you to think about crushing that person's hand.
So push down.
you gotta think about posteriorly tilting your pelvis.
So that means like if you had a tail, you would tuck your tail.
And when you tuck your tail, you make your back flat.
So from that flat back position, I am just going to extend the opposite side.
So I'm gonna extend my left hand with the left leg at the same time.
Notice I'm not touching the floor, so I just come a couple inches
off the ground with that left side, and I come back to that base position, now from there I rock up.
So it's a rock, get the heels down to the ground, and rock back slowly, that counts as one rep, and then you go back in.
Now, notice that I'm not using a bunch of momentum to rock up, I wanna start from this dead stop position, and then I just create that momentum with my core.
So it's dead stop position, I'm nice and still,
and rock up.
So if you do that the right way, that rock up is gonna really fire up the front abs.
All right, so we do the desired reps to one side and then you go to the other side and finish out.
So for my rotational rolling stretch, I'm setting up in my 90-90 position.
So I'm 90 degrees here and I'm 90 degrees here.
Now from here, I'm going to bring my fist out and I'm just going to squeeze the fist, get a little tension, get that core a little stability.
So if you're loose in this position, you're not going to be able to move.
So I want you to brace that core a little bit.
Now from here, I'm just rolling to this other side.
and I go straight up from here.
So now I'm down, roll, and I'm up, get to that full hip extension at the top.
Okay, so now it's just a smooth flow, straight over up,
Straight over, up.
If this is too difficult, you can use your hands for assistance.
So you can come down, support with your hands, support with your hands, push off the right hand and come up.
Support, support, push off the left hand and come up.
But if you get that down, then go to hands either straight out or you could just go hands here in front of your chest.
This drill is very good for training the internal and the external rotators of the hip.
We should not feel lateral stress in the knee.
So some people, if they do this the wrong way, they feel more of a pressure in the knee, either the medial or the lateral aspect.
We do not want any stress in the knee.
We should feel like the hips are the main joint being mobilized here.
So for the leg lowers, you've got to make sure that you anchor your hands to something stable.
So I'm holding onto a power rack.
Make sure that whatever you're holding onto is nice and stable so that that's your support.
If worse comes worse and all you have is a partner, your partner could stand over you and they could just grab onto your ankles, all right?
So what we're doing is negative.
So we're going to go three to four seconds on the eccentric.
So that means my legs are straight up and I'm going three to four seconds down.
I'm trying to keep my knees as straight as possible.
All right.
So control down the heel.
Stop a couple inches short of the floor.
And then we bend our knees and bring it back.
Okay, so I don't want the concentric to be the hard part.
So that's why we're bending our knees, coming back, extend the knees so that our legs are nice and long, and then we go back into that lowering phase.
If that is too easy, then we can keep our knees straight and go straight on the up and on the down.
But I would rather you really focus on that slow, controlled, eccentric, really squeezing that core with every rep.
Now where we want to feel this exercise is mostly front core.
So that abdominal wall should be fired up.
This is one exercise where we are going to get a pretty good burn.
If you're not getting a burn, I would extend the reps a little bit.
So go up a couple reps to the point where you are getting that big burn in the front core.
so for my lower back angels so I'm just gonna lay flat on the floor now from here I'm gonna bring my chest up and I'm gonna bring my legs up so I don't want my knees touching the floor and I don't want my chest touching the floor okay hands straight above the head and then I'm going a circular motion down towards the hips I'm facing the palms up and then I bring it back around at that top I'm facing the palms down alright so I'm kind of making
like a snow angel, but I'm staying up this whole time.
And you're gonna feel a good isometric contraction in the back, so the lower back, the erector muscles in the back, and then my glutes are gonna be fired up, and you're actually gonna feel a little bit in the hamstrings as well.
So that full post chain is getting a good isometric contraction here.
Let's do it.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for phase six, day one and day five.
This is already a very efficient workout.
You really shouldn't have to cut out anything here, but if your encore volume is so high that you can't handle all of this or you just don't have the time, you're going to skip the foam roller circuit, do the dynamic warmup, skip the acceleration jumpstart.
Great drill, but if you're pressed for time, that's one that we can take out.
Stutter Euro drill.
Great exercise, but again, if you're pressed for time, take it out.
Move straight down to single leg skip bounds.
Have to have that in here.
Always do our 10-minute dunk freestyle session unless you're going to be playing pickup later on and you feel like you're going to be dunking afterwards.
I know a lot of basketball players, after they're done playing pickup or at practice, they're competing against their friends, trying new dunks, that kind of stuff.
If that's you, then you could skip this here and do that later.
Just make sure you're getting at least 10 minutes worth, if not a little bit more, of dunk practice.
Triple contrast cluster.
This is probably the most important exercise for this phase, building that raw power.
This one is huge.
Never skip this.
Do all four sets.
Don't decrease the sets or the reps.
RFESS deficit squat, this is a great exercise.
We do want this exercise for pure strength and pure hypertrophy.
Very good because we haven't done a ton of hypertrophy work recently, so it's great to maintain hypertrophy and build some strength with this exercise.
If you had to, take it down to two sets.
Ball of the foot, one leg turn.
If you have to, you can skip it, but this is a great exercise.
You guys have already mastered this in previous phases, so we should be pretty good by now at this exercise.
Time to take it to the next level and become perfect.
7-11 breathing, as always, we want to do that.
Static stretch, as always, you can skip it if you don't have the time.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you could either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's going to be for the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day.
We're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running and vice versa on that other side.
all right i'm staying stiff with the feet so i'm not letting my heel collapse i want to stay on the ball of the foot and i'm just going to go about 50 of my max speed i'm not going too fast yet we're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips for the seal jacks it's basically like a jumping jack except i'm going to coordinate arms with the legs so i'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time back to neutral over with the left over with the left hand and then i'm just going to speed that up
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here.
Maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed.
So we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees.
Just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm going to get down.
touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch, so I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight, and I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom.
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
Two, three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
All right?
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for my acceleration jumpstart, I'm gonna start high on the toes.
I'm gonna start with my right hand up.
So if I'm going with my right leg forward, I start with my right hand up and my left hand down, okay?
I drop eccentrically, so I drop down as fast as I can and I land in this split stance, okay?
As soon as I land in this split stance, my right arm is now cocked back, my left arm is now up, and then I jump as far as I can.
So it's almost like a sprint, but in a sprint it would be more of a step.
Right now we're exaggerating that because I want you to learn how to apply horizontal force into the ground and cover as much distance as we can.
So what I like to think about with the arms is right hand up,
Switch, I like to pretend like I have sand in my hand and I'm throwing that sand as far as I can because a lot of that force comes from this arm, okay?
So I don't want you to relax and lightly bring this arm up.
I want you to throw that imaginary sand as far as you can as we get our body as far as we can with that step.
Now, make sure that you decelerate it.
So I want you to take off from that right foot
Get as far as you can, land right, stick left, hold for a second or two just to show yourself that you own that position and you have that deceleration, and then just walk it back.
So complete all of the reps to one side, and then I would switch it over.
So now my left hand is high, drop left foot is up, and we're going the opposite way.
This is a very good drill to teach that first step, to teach you how to apply force horizontally.
That's going to get that first step nice and explosive.
Let's do it.
Bye.
So for my stutter Euro drill, what I'm gonna do is go baseline all the way to the opposite free throw line, or if you're out on a track or a field, mark out 70 feet.
So what we're gonna do is three stutters.
So it's gonna be right baby step, left baby step, right baby step, and I pop off diagonally as far as I can.
I gotta put some force in the ground to cover that distance.
So it's gonna be
Right, left, right.
Push for distance.
Right, left, right.
Right, left, right.
So I'm gonna end up going diagonally down the court.
So make sure that you start in the corner of one baseline and then we're gonna end up in that opposite corner, all right?
Then on our next rep, we walk it back and we go on the other side.
Now, if you're doing this in a small space and you don't have that distance, I want you to go six each side.
So right, left, right.
That's one rep.
Turn it around.
Right, left, right.
turn it around.
So that would be two reps.
We go six, and then we go the other way.
Left, right, left, push.
The footwork is very similar to a normal Euro step, except instead of just a step, I want you to exaggerate and actually cover as much distance as we can.
Let's get it.
For my single leg skip bounds, what I'm gonna do is essentially get as high as I can off one leg, I'm gonna land with that same leg, and then I go into a diagonal bound.
So it's almost like a skip and a diagonal bound at the same time.
So what I'm doing is up, land, out,
up, land, out.
Of course, now I got to get rhythmic and I got to get fluid and build some speed with this exercise.
So if we have a court, we are going from baseline to the opposite free throw line.
If you're out on a field, mark off about 70 feet.
Now, if you don't have the space, it's okay.
You can always just do here,
here, and then just walk it back and do it again.
If you don't have the space, what we're gonna do is six repetitions per set.
So that means six each leg.
So there and there equals one, and then we can turn it around and bring it back, all right?
So six each leg, 12 total single leg jumps.
Keys here is reactivity off the ground.
I don't want you to slowly lower.
I don't want this to be more of a power or a force exercise.
I want this to be springy and I want it to be elastic off the floor.
Now, when you go into that diagonal, don't start to fade on the jump.
I need you to work on getting straight up, straight down, and then pushing into that next rep.
Now for our freestyle dunks, I put this in there because it's so important that you get out there and just allow your body to explore different approaches, different type of dunks, different type of jumping styles without me always trying to put you in a box and trying to get you to do one thing.
So I want you to set the clock for 10 minutes and I just want you to go get as many dunks as you can.
Take breaks in between if you need to.
I do want you to be recovered in between reps.
This isn't an endurance workout.
So get up off one foot.
Throw it down.
Walk back.
Recover for 30 seconds to a minute.
Come back in.
Take off off two.
Try to dunk left.
Whatever you want to do, get creative and do it.
Of course, if you can't dunk and all you can do is touch the bottom of the net, I don't care.
I still want you to get creative.
Come in off two and touch the net.
Come from baseline, get up off one and touch the net.
Try to jump off left, touch with the left.
Variability, variety is the key to longevity and it's super important for building kind of well-rounded explosiveness and athleticism.
And so I want you to get creative, set the clock for 10 minutes, and just freestyle dunk.
So for my triple contrast cluster sets, what I'm doing is three different exercises.
I'm going heavy load, moderate load, light load.
All right, you're going to need a stopwatch.
So what we're going to do is we're going to start with a barbell deadlift.
I do want you to go heavy here.
So if you have a trap bar, use that.
If you don't and you just have a barbell, use the barbell, go alternating grip.
We've covered
the deadlift exercise in the past, so refer back to the technique on that if you're not familiar with it, or if you're still not comfortable with doing heavy deadlifts, make sure you reach out to a personal trainer or somebody that can correct your form.
So of course, explode up.
all the way to full hip extension, squeeze the glutes to meet the bar.
So squeeze, meet that bar, and then lower back down, all right?
We're not lowering down with the RDL like we have done in past phases.
So in past phases, we've lowered it with an RDL to the floor.
Right now, we're just reversing it the same way that we brought it up, all right?
All we're doing is two repetitions.
So we hit two repetitions with a heavy weight.
Think about maybe 90% of your one rep max.
30 seconds off.
So as soon as you're done with that two reps, set the clock 30 seconds.
Once that 30 seconds is up, we're in with a high toss.
I'm using a 50 pound sandbag.
This is from Hyperware.
These are kind of expensive.
You can just use a med ball.
So if you have a med ball and a high ceiling, use the heaviest med ball that you got all the way up to 50 pounds.
So even if it's only 15, that's okay.
Anywhere from 15 to 50 pounds.
Now, if you don't have these, then you're just going to do a normal dumbbell jump.
So if you have this, you're going to start in that same position that we started in for our deadlift.
So I'm just going to explode as hard as I can and toss it as high as I can.
So it's boom.
toss, let it fall, step back over it, and go again.
If you don't have that or a med ball to throw overhead,
then you're simply gonna do a dumbbell jump.
So I'm using a 45 pounder right now, and we're just gonna go here, same position, deadlift start, and then explode as high as we can, bring it right back down, all right?
Two repetitions, set the clock for 30 seconds.
After that 30 seconds is up, we come to a box jump.
If you don't have the box, do a regular jump and land on the floor.
Only thing is I want you to focus on that eccentric speed.
So start high, all the way up on the toes, hands above the head, drop as fast as you can like you're attacking the floor, and then reverse it, get up as high as you can.
So it's here, attack the floor, get up, land nice and soft, and step back down.
Two repetitions.
Now once we're done with that, we take a full minute and a half off.
That completes one set.
So keep in mind this is a triple contrast.
So we're going extremely heavy, and then we're going moderate, and then we're going unresisted.
So we're really building up that potentiation, and by the time we get to that box jump, we should be able to get really, really high.
Obviously only two reps is very low rep, so it's high intensity, it's max effort,
and then we get that 30-second recovery and we go into that next one.
So it's not something where we're going to feel a big burn in the legs.
When people do circuit training, they assume that they should be feeling a burn.
We do not want that for max explosiveness.
So I just want you to stay fresh throughout the entire, whether it's three, four, or five sets, I want you to stay fresh, but I want you to feel neurally activated, like your brain and your nervous system are just firing those muscles and you're getting that explosiveness to the next level.
Let's get it.
Okay, so if you'd like to do rear foot elevated deficit instead of the leg press, that's completely fine.
We could do these with heavy dumbbells elevated on a bumper plate, or I love to do rear foot elevated split squats on a Smith machine if you have one.
The reason I like the Smith machine is because we can get max intent, max explosiveness without worrying about the stability of being on one leg.
So this is way better for explosiveness.
So what I'm going to do, set up my bench behind here.
I know most of you guys don't have the rear foot elevated stand.
That's okay.
Set up your bench, get your bumper plate, and then I'm going to come down to one knee and I'm going to adjust.
Okay.
So I'm going to adjust so that my ankle is directly underneath the knee.
Now from here,
I can stand.
I can lift off.
Now I'm coming all the way down, full range of motion until that knee touches and explode.
Now you do have to have good hip and decent ankle mobility here, so you might not be able to do it elevated on the bumper plate.
If that's the case, that's okay.
I'm using it so that I can get a bigger range of motion and train the muscle over a longer range of motion.
So it's all the way down, control once that knee taps, explode up as fast as we can.
So we're getting explosive over that big range of motion.
Let's get it.
So for my ball of the foot, one leg turns, I'm going to come to the ball of my foot.
I cannot have my heel down on the ground.
So we're decreasing that surface area, increasing the stability needs.
So I'm here pointing that big foot down into the ground.
First, just find your balance.
Now, if you find it there, we're coming into an RDL.
Try to get the torso flat to the ground.
And now from here, I'm just doing turns.
All right, as big as I can back to neutral and then to the other side.
Now those turns might be very small like this to start, but as you get better, I want you to do full turns, full rotations up as high as we can.
All right, you're going to feel the feet completely burning from the toes all the way back up through the heels, back up through the calves, lateral aspects of the calves.
The lower leg and the feet are going to be firing the outside muscles and those small intrinsic muscles.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breaths.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff i mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay i got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just going to go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm going to sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down to the elbows and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not gonna lift off and I'm just gonna lay my head back and just pull
this knee as far towards the chest as i can now a lot of you as you pull the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors if that's the case try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor, that's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for phase seven, day one and day four.
So as you can tell, we actually switch our workout days.
Starting in phase seven, we're actually going four days a week of lower body.
We're all about progressive overload.
That's how we get better.
That's how we get gains.
and through the last six months we progressively overloaded volume and or intensity.
Now we're overloading frequency.
So we're going from three lower body days to four lower body days.
Now the myth that you need 48 hours to recover the muscle is not true.
It is all dose dependent.
So basically that means if we really beat down the lower body and we do a lot of sets per muscle group, then it's true we're gonna need
at least 48 hours to recover that muscle.
But if we do shorter, more efficient workouts, then it's only gonna take around 24 hours to recover and be ready to go.
So you're gonna notice that our workouts are very, very short and efficient.
You should be able to get these workouts done in probably 45 minutes.
This plyo emphasis day, we're in and we're out.
I know at the end of the workout you're going to feel like you should be doing more because you didn't get the burn that you want to, but that's exactly how it should be.
And if you keep going, then you're not going to be fully recovered for tomorrow's workout.
So we want just enough.
Think about it like this.
We don't want to chug a whole bottle of Advil to get a headache better.
We want one or two at a time.
So we want small doses more frequently.
So that is what we're going for in this phase.
That being said, we do not want to skip anything on day one or day four.
Do the program as is.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you could either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one is going to be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and i'm going to really loosen up that fascia a lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day we're moving we're cutting we're jumping we got to really start to loosen that up
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're gonna go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch I'm just gonna go over with the left leg I'm gonna come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back okay so I'm gonna get down
touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I wanna get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat.
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two, three.
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
All right.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for my lateral med ball toss, I'm basically going to push out laterally, and I'm going to change directions as fast as I can, push through the med ball, kind of like a shot put.
Boom, you got your guide hand and your follow through hand, so almost like a basketball shot, except it's going to be horizontal, it's going to be with a lot more power, and this is really driven from that lower body.
So it's going to be here.
Boom.
Transition.
Push as hard as I can.
Notice I didn't stay here and just turn the upper body.
I pushed off and I fully turned my body.
I'm getting that good rotational power and that good lateral power.
A lot of times when we're playing defense and defender goes by us, it's a rotational push.
It's not always lateral.
It's not always linear.
It's rotational.
So we're working on that same thing here.
remember i want you to transition out quick so it's got to be here and then immediately push out so it's bone drive out toss as hard as you can pick it up and reset so if you do not have the med ball then let's just do regular lateral bounds so it's here
push high as we can as far as we can with short ground contact time that's still going to get us the same qualities as far as that lateral power we're just missing out on the rotational power but that's okay i know a lot of you guys don't have that med ball so if that's the case that's a good alternative let's get it
All right, so now on this combo exercise, if you have the wall and you have a court or somewhere to sprint off, then we're gonna do the full drill.
If not, it's okay, we're just gonna do half of the drill.
So if you have the wall and the space, make sure the wall is concrete, it's not gonna break.
So it's gonna be starting in a split stance, it's gonna be drive, so I'm pushing off both feet.
I'm really gonna drive through this front foot, like it's first step explosiveness, push the ball into the wall as hard as I can, and then I'm gonna decelerate, push laterally, open up and take off.
So it's gonna be here,
Boom, boom, push out.
So sprint out as far as you can.
So if you have half court, sprint it through half court.
A lot of you guys don't have that distance, so it's boom, boom, maybe sprint it out a couple steps.
What matters most is that change of direction.
So we want boom, sharp change of direction, toe is still pointed forward, sharp change of direction, rotationally, and get out of there.
All right, I want sharp cuts.
If you want to set out a cone, you can so that you have that accountability to get out over the cone and then open up and push out.
Now if you don't have the med ball, pretend like you do.
So it's going to be here, pretend like you got that med ball, boom, boom, open up, and push out, sprint as far as you can.
So for my bound sprints, what I'm going to do, if you have a court and a half, then we're going to go a full court and a half with the bound sprint.
We're going to bound six times, three each leg, get as far as we can.
And then after that six, one, boom, hit the ground running, sprint it through a court and a half.
Now I know a lot of you guys don't have two courts set up this way.
So what you're going to do is just 54 meters.
So you could
Mark it out on a track or on a field or anywhere where you have 54 meters.
Look, if you don't have that space, it's okay.
Let's just do the bounds to half court or six times, which will get you around half court and then sprint it through the other half court, all right?
So work with what you've got.
But if you have the room, I'm going to start in a split stance and I'm getting out as far as I can.
Of course, on my bounds, I do want to get some height with it and I got to get off the ground quick, quick, quick.
So it's going to be boom, one, two, three, four, five, six,
sprint it out as fast as we can through the rest of that 54 meters.
Main goals of this exercise is to get as far as we can with the bounds and then to get from point A to point B as fast as we possibly can.
So time yourself every session.
I want you to beat that record.
So for my one leg depth jump, I'm gonna go on a box.
Now I wanna start with a box that's pretty low, so somewhere around mid-shin.
As we get better, we can go on higher boxes.
So I want box number one, and then I want box number two.
Box number two is basically as high as we can jump and land in a good safe position.
So if you don't have two boxes, that's okay.
We can just jump and land on the floor without that second box.
But what we're gonna do
is step up just like a normal depth jump we're just dropping off we're not jumping off so i'm just going to drop off and i'm nice and reactive and quick off the ground now just with one leg and i jump off right and i land on right so it's just a step
jump, land, stick that landing, and then step it back down.
All right.
I got to be springy off the ground, especially on one leg.
If you really get low and you sink down into those joints, you're not going to be able to reverse it and get back out of it.
So you really got to come down, hit that floor and get up nice and springy, nice and quick off the ground.
Now, the way that we progress this exercise is we can just go a higher box.
that we're dropping off.
So I can get all the way up until that box is around knee height.
I wouldn't go too much higher than knee height because it's just going to be too much stress on the landing.
But the higher the box we drop off, the more eccentric force we have to absorb and redirect.
So this drill is great for building that elasticity and that reactiveness off the ground.
Let's get it.
So for my contrast split stance jumps, what I'm gonna do is hold some light dumbbells.
So I like to go with around 15 pounds and I'm just going in a split stance.
I don't want a big exaggerated lunge stance.
You can't be explosive from that stance.
So it's a baby split right here.
We're gonna jump as high as I can and I'm landing on the other side.
Now I'm gonna go rapid.
So I gotta get fast off the ground, reactive off the ground, get as high as I can.
So it's just boom, boom.
boom all right now pay attention to the rep ranges if it says five reps i'm hitting five reps each side and then i immediately go in to my assisted jumps so you want to use a band that you feel like it gives you an extra like 10 to 20 percent on your jump height we don't want so much band tension that you're flying out the roof we also don't want to set up right under a power rack because we're going to hit our head so
If you're like at LA Fitness and you were in a basketball court, you could throw it over the bar behind the hoop.
Or if you have a power rack, throw that band over the rack and then step back.
So if that band is too long, you can kind of just wrap your hands through it a couple times.
Now I'm gripping this and I'm just going to step back a little bit so that I know I'm not going to hit my head.
And I'm doing the same thing.
So it's... All right.
So we are going to do the same amount of reps there.
So if it said five reps, that means five reps each leg here, five reps each leg here.
So keep in mind, normally when we do contrast training, we're splitting it up where we go like a heavy lift and then we take a minute or two or three minutes off and then we go into the plyo
For this one, I want you to go directly in there.
That's why we're really not gonna tire you out with those split stance jumps.
It's gonna be pretty low rep, and then I want you going straight in to that over speed exercise.
This is great for training the nervous system for optimal explosiveness.
We're training our force capabilities there at a high speed with the light dumbbells, and then we come in here for over speed training.
That's teaching the nervous system to send signals faster and activate those fast switch muscle fibers at a very high velocity.
which is great for improving our encore vertical jump and our overall explosiveness.
Let's get it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
and I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just going to go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm going to sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee.
So we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius.
That's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day two and day five of phase seven.
This is more of our strength day.
We only have one very explosive exercise.
Our nervous system should be a little bit more tired from yesterday's workout.
Our muscles shouldn't be beat down, but our nervous system might be a little more tired.
This exercise is a little bit more about the muscles, putting load on the muscles, and less on the nervous system.
The only one that is more explosive and fast paced is the split stance clean.
So we do want to keep that exercise in there.
Moving down to the one leg box step down, we can add load to this.
So if you want to add a vest and add dumbbells, let's do it.
The Nordic curl, it's all about
control on the way down.
Since it's an eccentric dominant exercise, this is going to produce a lot of soreness in the hamstrings, so it doesn't feel hard.
You may not get a huge burn while you're in the gym.
The next day, you're going to feel it, so don't overdo these.
Moving down to the rapid calf raise, it's a little bit higher rep.
This is good for our elasticity through the Achilles tendon, and we should get a pretty good burn in the calf, especially up in that gastroc, the big calf muscle.
As always, we're going to do the 7-Eleven breathing.
If you had to, you could skip the static stretch.
I don't think you really need to take out anything here.
Even if you're pressed for time, this should be a very short and efficient workout.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you could either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're gonna do is the calves.
So we're just gonna cross over and I'm gonna push myself up so my hips are off the ground and I'm just gonna roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over, we're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm gonna go on the side of the roller now and I'm just gonna come down into a plank position and I'm gonna roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh so i'm getting my whole quad in this one and if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee then start here and finish and then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping, we gotta really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
all right i'm staying stiff with the feet so i'm not letting my heel collapse i want to stay on the ball of the foot and i'm just going to go about 50 of my max speed i'm not going too fast yet we're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips for the seal jacks it's basically like a jumping jack except i'm going to coordinate arms with the legs so i'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time back to neutral
over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
Maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go over with the left leg.
I'm gonna come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't wanna go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back.
So it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch.
So I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position.
And I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight.
And I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom.
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're gonna go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
one, two, three, lean, one, two, three, heels back down, one, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for our split stance clean, what I'm going to do is set up in a split stance.
I'm going to come up on that back toe.
So I'm on my left toe and that right foot is fully grounded.
Slight bend in that front knee.
Now from there, it's a hip hinge.
So I'm sending my hips backwards until my knuckles reach around knee level.
Once I hit that point, I explosively come up.
The dumbbells are going to fly up from the momentum of that hip extension.
So it's boom, boom, I'm driving up that left leg.
So it's going to be here, boom, drive, stabilize at the top for one to two seconds, and then come back down, reset, and you're back in.
So boom.
drive, stabilize.
I don't want you to feel like you're using your arms to curl it up.
Your biceps shouldn't be getting tired here.
I just want the dumbbells to come up from the momentum of that powerful hip extension.
Now for the weight, start light and gradually go up.
Once you get really good at this exercise, we can start going up.
30 pounds in each hand, 40 pounds in each hand, 50 pounds in each hand.
We've never had anybody get past 60.
I don't think any of you guys will get there.
because it's probably gonna get so slow that you're losing a lot of that velocity.
So I still want you to stay fast and explosive, but I do want the weight to challenge you at the same time.
So for my single leg box step down, I'm going to go in a box around knee height.
Basically, I'm going to hold a light dumbbell.
So I can go 15s in each hand at the most.
So what I want you to do with the dumbbells is as we go down, I want you to kick it forward.
So if you keep them down by your hip, you're not going to have the right counterbalance and you're going to fall backwards.
So as you're going down, the dumbbells go higher and higher and higher.
And then once that foot taps and we're on the way up, it's the opposite.
we come up with the lower body and we go down with the weight.
So you're using it as a counterbalance.
So I want you to go on the edge of that box, make sure that box is heavy enough so you're not tipping over.
If you need to, put some dumbbells on the side of that box to counterbalance.
So I'm just going to drop down normal squat mechanics.
I got a break from the hip first.
So it's a hip hinge and then I go down with the knee.
I do not want your knee going too far over your toe on this drill.
So it's going to be here.
Tap that heel and explode up.
I do not want you to push off the ground.
I just want you to tap that heel.
and explode.
It's gonna be two to three seconds down and then as fast as we can on the way up.
So you could start maybe five, 10s or 15 pounders.
If you do wanna load heavier, let's go with that vest.
If it's taking you over a second to get up, then you're loaded too much because I wanna see you get up fast so that it translates to our high speed strength.
So for our Nordic hamstring curls, if you have a partner, this is the easiest way to go.
So your partner is going to sit behind you and hold down your ankles.
Now he's got to push pretty hard because your whole body weight is going to be coming down.
So if he's light, then you're going to lift him up.
So he's got to put a little bit of force in there.
Now I like to use a foam roller.
So you put the front of your ankle on a foam roller and then you kind of dig your toes into the ground and it's just a little bit more comfortable on the ankles.
Now, I know a lot of you guys don't have a partner, so this is how we would do it without a partner.
I would set up a barbell and make sure it's nice and heavy.
Make sure you got weights on both sides.
If you have a rack, then put it on the inside of the rack and then you put a weighted plate on the other side so that the barbell is not going to roll.
If you don't have a rack, we would use the barbell and then we would put a weight behind it and we would put another 45 pound plate in front of it.
So it's still kind of trapped in there and it's not going to roll back and forth.
This is optional, but I like to use this because it's a little bit softer.
So I just use a pad there.
And then you always need a pad
for your knees all right so this is your setup now from here a lot of people go tall and they come down i if you're super advanced that's fine i would rather see a little bit of hip flexion so we're initially in just a little bit of hip flexion and then from there we're going down i want you to go basically as slow as you can or four seconds all the way down this is a lowering exercise once i get to the bottom i'm going to push back up and i'm coming all the way back up pretty fast you don't have to go slow on the way up
so initial hip flexion from there I'm not bending the hips more I stay in this initial hip flexion and I slowly lower lower lower lower push off and come back up if you can get a light push off that's great a lot of you guys to start
you're going to have to really push off hard to get back up.
Otherwise, you're going to get stuck halfway up.
So if you get extremely good at this, we can eventually either go a very light tap or there are some people who have such good strength to body weight ratios, they can just put their hands behind their back and do the whole thing.
Now, you might cramp up on this exercise if you're not used to this intense of a hamstring contraction.
It's a very hard hamstring contraction.
So if you cramp, then stretch it out.
Try to get back into it, but this might be a little bit too advanced and your hamstrings aren't quite used to it yet.
So just try to make it easier or come up with an alternative if you continue to cramp.
Now the other mistake that people make is they point the toes and they go from there.
A lot of times your calf will start to cramp when you're in that position.
So I like to go toes kind of straight down into the ground.
So I'm digging into the ground and then I get a lot less in the calf and I really just feel it straight through the hamstrings, through the glutes, and then you should feel a little bit through the low back as well.
So for my rapid calf raise, I could use a bumper plate or I could use a stair, step, anything that's nice and stable.
Now you're going to want to hold on to something for this exercise, even if your balance is good.
So I'm going to hold on to a power rack, hold on to whatever you want that keeps you nice and balanced.
About half of my foot is going on the step, so I just want the ball of my foot on there, my heel is hanging off.
Now, it's a normal calf raise, except we're going for max elasticity, so I want you to bounce with it, and we're still getting a full range of motion, so it's nice and rapid.
So explode up to the toe, and then drop down, get your heel down as low as you can, and pop back up, all right?
So it's nice and fast.
and you shouldn't feel like it's a long, slow contraction like you normally would do.
Now this is a higher rep exercise.
If you do start to get extremely fatigued, you can always pull yourself up with the arms a little bit and kind of give yourself a little bit of assistance with your upper body because I don't want you to get so tired that you start to slow down.
I want you to stay
nice and rapid and bouncy because if you lose that speed and you lose that bouncy and that springiness, then we're getting away from the Achilles and we're getting more on to strictly using that calf muscle contraction.
We want the perfect combination of both on this exercise.
Let's do it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
okay so i'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill all right so it's in through the nose and i want to make sure that my stomach is rising okay your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they were in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we want to do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you wanna reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
and I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down to the elbows and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day three and day six.
Basically, there is no minimum dose advice for this workout.
As you can see, it's already very short and efficient.
We shouldn't have to skip anything here.
If you're really pressed for time, you could go down to two sets, but I really recommend that you get done all three sets of everything.
Let's get after it.
So for my Russian Dumbbell Punch, what I'm gonna do is come to this 45 degree angle here, and I'm just gonna touch my elbow to the floor, and then I'm gonna punch across.
So it's gonna be touch and punch, touch,
and punch.
I'm trying not to lose that position.
Now, as you go down, we might move our legs a little bit, but for the most part, we want to keep that same angle.
I don't want to see you flatten out and then come back.
So we're just staying there and it's just a little bit of a rotation from the torso and then explode into that rotation the other way.
cross punch.
I want you to start light here.
So start maybe 10, 15 pound dumbbell and then gradually go up.
Some people get up to like 30, 35, 40 pounds, but you got to have a crazy strong core to get above the 30 pound mark.
So for my band pronation supination, I'm going to sit up nice and tall and I'm just going to get some tension on this band.
You can do this with a thick band or like I'm doing, I'm doubled up with a thin band and I want it around the ball of the foot.
So I'm going to sit up nice and tall and I'm going to pull on it.
Already I feel a stretch in the hamstrings and in my calves.
Now from here, I'm just going to go into pronation.
So I'm pulling with the right side.
hold for three seconds, and then I switch and I pull more with the left side, and that's when I go into what we call ankle or foot supination.
Hold there.
So it's here, three seconds, here, three seconds.
And we're gonna cycle through that five times, all right?
So when I'm pulling, I'm feeling that stretch in different areas, especially down in the calf muscle.
You're going to feel it on the lateral calf, and then you're going to feel it on the medial calf.
You'll feel it in different parts of the hamstring as well, and you're getting a stretch through the ankles.
we need proper pronation and supination, we need enough range of motion, and a lot of times that calf is limiting what we can do.
A lot of us have good ankle mobility here in the sagittal plane, but here we don't quite have that range of motion and it can really limit our overall athleticism on the court.
So for my rolling cross touch, what I'm going to do is I'm just going to bring my feet off the ground and I'm going to bring my hands off the ground so I'm in this hollow body position.
I don't want to have an excessive curve in the lower back, so I want to think about tilting my pelvis, pretend like you have a tail, and think about tucking that tail so your back is nice and flat to the floor.
And then from there, I'm just rolling.
So my feet still aren't going to touch the ground.
My hands are still not going to touch the ground.
I'm going to roll over.
I'm going to roll over again.
So I end up in the same position and then I'm going to go cross body.
So when I roll that way, I'm going to go left hand touches the right toe and back down.
And again, left hand, right toe back down.
And then I roll back to the other side.
So now I'll end up in the same position.
Now, once I'm back here, I go right hand left.
So right hand, left toe.
And then again, I roll back to the other side.
So the reason that we are rolling is it is one of the most fundamental movement patterns that humans have and we lose it over time.
But when we roll, we're training so many core muscles and we're training them reactively
It is a training stimulus for the core that we can't get with any traditional core exercise.
So it's really building up that core stability and it's building it up naturally and reflexively which is really going to carry over to all of our athletic movements.
All right, so for my band straight leg raise, I'm gonna try to keep my knee pretty straight.
I could have a slight bend if we need to.
I'm gonna keep my foot dorsiflexed, so that means my toe back towards the head, the band is around the ball of the foot, and then I'm just going rapid with it.
So let's go to a comfortable range.
and then we can gradually start to raise it higher and higher.
Make sure this opposite leg doesn't lift up, but this is not slow static stretching.
This is very dynamic.
We're working on that elasticity back in the hamstrings and in the glutes.
So I'm just gonna build up
that speed and get it nice and rapid there.
All right, we should feel a stretch.
It shouldn't be complete discomfort.
So maybe like a seven out of 10 or an eight out of 10.
We're getting a slight stretch.
If we push it to a 10 out of 10, you're probably gonna get a strained muscle.
So push slightly out of your comfort zone, but it shouldn't hurt so bad that it's unbearable.
Let's do it.
So for our side plank, you have several different options.
So option one, we stack the feet, we get up nice and flat so I'm in one straight line, my hips are not sagging, my elbow is right underneath the shoulder, and I'm just squeezing that oblique on the inside of the core, and I'm just gonna hold in this position.
now if that is too easy then you can add weight and how we add weight to a side plank is we go here right at the hip and i'm going to come up nice and flat now don't try to balance it i need to hold this weight down and i'm just going to hold in this position
for the desired time, all right?
Now, if that's too difficult and the stacking of the feet is too difficult, then you could go one knee bent.
So I bend this knee back at 90 degrees, and then I'm straight with the other leg, and I'm getting up that way.
So still working the same muscles, but that option is a lot easier.
The middle option, the intermediate option, is the regular side plank with the stacked feet, and the harder version is with the plate.
So for my kneeling hip mobility, I'm gonna go down on both knees, get up nice and tall.
I'm gonna go out with my fists and I'm gonna squeeze my fists and put a little bit of tension in the course.
You gotta kinda squeeze the core a little bit for this drill to create stability.
And now from here, I'm pretending like I have this fence right here and I gotta step out over that fence.
But as I do that, I don't wanna start to tilt my shoulders.
I wanna keep my shoulders as flat as I can, my hips as flat as I can, and really just work
on that range of motion.
So it's going to be up, out, and over, and then up, out, and back.
So I don't want you just going here.
I want you to pretend like you've got to really step out and step up and out and around.
The bigger range of motion we can get here, the better.
This is working on our hip mobility, but it's also working on our hip stability, which goes a long way in improving the overall quality of our hips.
Now, the reason why this is important is we need great hip mobility and stability for the vertical jump.
but especially for ball handling, what separates players like Kyrie Irving is he can get down in these low positions and he can be explosive and stable in these positions.
99% of people can't even get to these positions because their nervous system doesn't trust them being in those positions.
It feels unsafe and that's because we don't have the quality of the hips that somebody like Kyrie Irving has, James Harden, Kemba Walker, all these guys that are very good movers, they all have very good hips,
with mobility and dynamic stability.
So this drill can go a long way in improving your jump, but also improving how you move on the court.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day three and day six of phase eight.
So the core is already very efficient.
We shouldn't have to cut out anything there.
If you're already mobile, again, I'm okay with you taking out the mobility drills.
One that I want you to do is the ankle toe crawls.
A lot of people have mobility, but they don't have mobility in the toes, and it limits the triple extension on their first step explosiveness.
Definitely do that.
You can skip the adductor stretch if your adductors are already nice and flexible.
Rotational rolling mobility.
Most people do struggle with this internal, external rotation of the hip.
I would advise doing that, but if you're already extremely flexible, then skip it.
and the band straight leg raise.
If you're flexible in the hamstrings or in the post chain, skip it.
But most of you guys, I think that would still be a good exercise for overall elasticity in the post chain.
All right, let's get it.
So for our stability ball mountain climber hold, I'm going to use a stability ball.
If you don't have a stability ball, you could just use a bench or a chair or something where you could just put your hands.
I'm going to use a box for my feet.
If you don't have that, just go on the floor.
It's completely fine, but the box is going to make it a little bit more difficult.
So I'm just going to hold on to this stability ball.
Now make sure your hands aren't sweaty.
If your hands are sweaty, you're going to want to use a towel or something over the ball because you're going to slip off.
I'm going to hold right here and then I'm going elevated.
For some of you already, that's the workout right there.
Make sure that your wrists are directly underneath the elbow, elbow underneath the shoulder.
Squeeze that core.
If that's hard enough for you, just hold for 30 seconds.
But most of us, we're going to go for reps.
So it's going to be drive one leg, hold, one, two, and then switch.
Hold, one, two, switch.
All right?
So right leg, left leg, that is one rep.
Make sure that you get a good hard core contraction every rep.
If we relax that core, then we're going down to the floor.
Now, if you have any type of wrist problems or this exercise makes your wrist sore, then let's just go to our elbows and do a regular plank on the ball.
And then we got the same thing here.
Hold, release.
Hold, release.
All right, we're gonna get the same stimulus to the core, so if you have those wrist problems or you're getting a ton of shots on the court and your wrists are a little bit tired from the amount of shots that you're getting, it's fine to just go on those elbows.
So for my ankle toe crawls, what I'm going to do is get in a half kneeling position.
I'm going to work on my ankle dorsiflexion by driving my knee as far as I can over the toe.
And then I'm going to flow straight into my toe stretch.
So I got to get this knee down to the floor while keeping my big toe and my other four toes down on the ground.
So I'm here.
Now look at that position that I'm in with the toe.
So I'm challenging my toe mobility.
So what I'm going to do is just crawl in this position and I can do anywhere from four to eight reps each leg.
So I'm going to start at four.
So I'm here.
nice and slow, look how I crawl the hand forward, and then I ground that next foot, drive the knee over the toe, and gradually transition, all right?
So I'm literally just crawling, and I'm challenging my ankle mobility,
and my toe mobility as I go.
So this is essential when it comes to getting shin angles.
So you guys hear me talk a lot about the most explosive athletes have good shin angles.
If you can get horizontal shin angles, we produce more horizontal force, which means we get somewhere faster, right?
So horizontal force production is essential, but
If you get here and you lock up, right, because you don't have the ankle mobility or you have the ankle mobility but you don't have the toe mobility, we can't get that shin angle.
So now we have vertical shins.
I don't care how much force you produce with vertical shins, you can't get horizontal.
So half the battle is how much force we produce.
The other half of the battle is the angle that we're producing the force.
And so that's why we're training
This ankle mobility, you see how I got to be able to get my knee far out over my toe, which takes dorsiflexion range of motion.
But as I extend this hip, I need to have that toe range of motion.
If that toe locks up, then I don't get full extension of the hip.
So we need that dorsiflexion and we need that toe range of motion so that we can get these good shin angles and get full triple extension on our first step explosiveness.
So we're going to do anywhere from four to eight reps, and we can do anywhere from two to four sets.
Do this a couple days a week, up to three days a week.
This is a good one that you can just add to your warm-ups.
You can add this to your dynamic warm-ups, or if you're at home and you're bored watching TV, it's a great exercise to do just to challenge that ankle mobility and that toe mobility.
Let's get it.
So for my leg climbs, I'm going to go down on my back.
I'm going to make sure that my back is nice and flat.
I'm going to go about six inches off the ground with this left leg.
And then I'm going to go straight up 90 degree angle with that right leg.
Some of you will be a little less.
That's okay.
All right.
So what I'm going to do is three grabs to the leg.
So it's going to be left, right, left.
All right.
Left, right, left.
left and I'm not really grabbing and pulling on my leg much.
I'm just doing this so that I can really control that contraction from the abs.
Alright, so left,
Right, left, and come back down.
Left, right, left, and come back down.
So this is really isolating the abs.
We're also getting a very good hamstring stretch.
And for some of you, it'll be an opposite hip flexor stretch because when we're in that 90 degree angle, a lot of you guys like to lift that leg.
So we're getting hip flexor, we're getting hamstring, and then you're gonna feel we're gonna get a huge abdominal contraction.
Let's do it.
So for my adductor stretch with rotation, I'm going to go straight out with one leg.
I'm keeping this knee straight.
I'm on the inside edge of that foot.
I'm down on this right knee and then I'm going to sit my hip all the way back to my heel or as close as I can.
elbows are going to be extended and then i'm just going to reach under as far as i can so the further i reach the bigger stretch i get in the inside of that left leg so i'm here reach and then rotate up as high as i can and right back into it so that's one rep
That's two reps, all right?
So finish the desired reps and then we're gonna switch over and do it on the other side.
So the adductor muscles are one of the most commonly strained muscles in basketball and in a lot of other sports as well.
It's extremely important because when we go to slide, we need enough flexibility to really get range of motion, but also not to pull those muscles.
And also the adductor magnus is a hip extensor muscle, so it's important for the vertical jump
It's important for any type of squatting, single leg squatting, double leg squatting.
The adductors are extremely important and they're worked almost every single day.
So we're always beating them down into the ground.
Exercises like this are great for getting that flexibility to make sure that we don't injure these muscles.
Okay, for the cable drop step rotation, I'm just going to use a cable start light and build up gradually.
Or if you don't have a cable, you could use a band.
I'm going to interlock my fingers over the handle and just step it out just a little bit.
All right.
We're gonna come into a quarter squat position.
Now, to open up that way, I gotta drive off the right foot.
I'm gonna open up and I'm gonna get that left foot down so that that toe is pointing that way, all right?
I don't want you to go into rotation until that foot is down.
So I'm here, I push into position, and then from here I can open up and explode there.
Now on the way back, I'm coming halfway, hands right in front of the chest, fire up that core, two to three seconds, and then release back to the start.
So it's foot down, explode, come back, hold.
release alright so the reason that I want you to not just go into rotation but get the foot down first is we're then gonna work that kind of recoil core we're gonna work as the full fascia system instead of just muscular power alright so we're getting here and then we get a good recoil through the core and we get here and then coming back we get that pause and then release
do the desired reps to one side, and then go back and do the desired reps to the other side.
We should feel a burn through the core, especially the side in the obliques.
So for my rotational rolling stretch, I'm setting up in my 90-90 position.
So I'm 90 degrees here, and I'm 90 degrees here.
Now from here, I'm going to bring my fist out, and I'm just going to squeeze the fist, get a little tension, get that core a little stability.
So if you're loose in this position, you're not going to be able to move.
So I want you to brace that core a little bit.
Now from here, I'm just rolling to this other side.
and I go straight up from here.
So now I'm down, roll, and I'm up, get to that full hip extension at the top.
Okay, so now it's just a smooth flow, straight over up,
Straight over, up.
If this is too difficult, you can use your hands for assistance.
So you can come down, support with your hands, support with your hands, push off the right hand and come up.
Support, support, push off the left hand and come up.
But if you get that down, then go to hands either straight out or you could just go hands here in front of your chest.
This drill is very good for training the internal and the external rotators of the hip.
We should not feel lateral stress in the knee.
So some people, if they do this the wrong way, they feel more of a pressure in the knee, either the medial or the lateral aspect.
We do not want any stress in the knee.
We should feel like the hips are the main joint being mobilized here.
So for my lower back angels, so I'm just going to lay flat on the floor.
Now from here, I'm going to bring my chest up and I'm going to bring my legs up.
So I don't want my knees touching the floor and I don't want my chest touching the floor.
Okay, hands straight above the head and then I'm going a circular motion down towards the hips.
I'm facing the palms up and then I bring it back around at that top.
I'm facing the palms down.
All right, so I'm kind of making
like a snow angel, but I'm staying up this whole time.
And you're going to feel a good isometric contraction in the back.
So the lower back, the erector muscles in the back, and then my glutes are going to be fired up.
And you're actually going to feel a little bit in the hamstrings as well.
So that full post chain is getting a good isometric contraction here.
Let's do it.
All right, so for my band straight leg raise, I'm gonna try to keep my knee pretty straight.
I could have a slight bend if we need to.
I'm gonna keep my foot dorsiflexed, so that means my toe back towards the head, the band is around the ball of the foot, and then I'm just going rapid with it.
So let's go to a comfortable range.
and then we can gradually start to raise it higher and higher.
Make sure this opposite leg doesn't lift up, but this is not slow static stretching.
This is very dynamic.
We're working on that elasticity back in the hamstrings and in the glutes.
So I'm just gonna build up
that speed and get it nice and rapid there all right we should feel a stretch it shouldn't be complete discomfort so maybe like a 7 out of 10 or an 8 out of 10 we're getting a slight stretch if we push it to a 10 out of 10 you're probably going to get a strained muscle so push slightly out of your comfort zone but it shouldn't hurt so bad that it's unbearable let's do it
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You could do long or you could do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you could just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
so you could either go this way or you could go vertical so if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute now always if we want more pressure we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
we could go bent bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll so after we're done with the foam rolling circuit i like to get out a lacrosse ball you could use a golf ball a baseball anything hard and i'm just going to really dig into that heel so i'm going to apply some pressure in there i'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot
and I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary, just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
And I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're gonna go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch i'm just gonna go over with the left leg i'm gonna come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch, so I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight, and I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there i'm gonna go five cycles and then i'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo i'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and i'm going down i'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because i want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor i'm going back with the hip like i would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're gonna go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
one, two, three, lean, one, two, three, heels back down, one, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for my one leg hurdle jumps, I'm just going to set up two hurdles.
I'm going to set them up about 15 feet apart to start.
That's kind of the easier version and then we're going to mix up that distance later on.
So I'm going with the high hurdles from Champion Sports.
You don't need these.
All you need is a small hurdle, even a pair of shoes.
It doesn't really matter.
All that matters is that you're jumping as high as you can and that we have some sort of marker so that we can work on our timing and our steps.
I'm going to jump over, so I'm going to get a running start, I don't care how far it is.
Running start, jump off the left, get over that hurdle, now you're going to land on your right.
So then it would be right, left, right, left, take off again.
So we're always taking off with our left, and then we get over and we land with our right, okay?
So, so much of the jump is timing, rhythm and being able to take short steps and then long steps.
And so the easier version is where we have this set distance and it's like at least 15 feet apart so we can get those multiple steps in between.
Now as you get good at this, I want you to mess around with that distance.
So start to shorten it up.
Maybe you put it, you know, 8 to 10 feet away and now all you can do is get a right-left jump.
So I want you to split it up by days.
I think the first day that you do this drill, let's just keep it long distance to where it's the most comfortable
for you we can get multiple steps the next day maybe shorten it up a little bit and then the next day shorten it up even more to the point where we're getting over this first hurdle and all we can do is get right left jump all right so i want you to mix it up the more you mix up the distance the harder it's going to be for you and the more versatile we're going to be with our jumps
So for my rapid crossover step, what I'm gonna do is just start here, nice and low.
It's gonna be a crossover step.
So right foot goes over the left.
I gotta swivel the hips.
So if you don't swivel the hips, it's gonna look like this.
It's not gonna look very athletic.
You got to be able to keep your chest relatively forward.
It's going to turn a little bit and turn the hips.
We got to dissociate between the hips and the torso.
So it's going to be crossover step.
Boom.
Now I'm going to plant.
Notice it's all about this shin angle.
So I got to get that good steep shin angle.
I'm already leaning in this direction and now it's going to be left foot crossover step.
So boom.
Boom, boom.
All right, we're just going back and forth.
It's all about how quick and how explosively we can plant and change direction.
So we're getting that lateral change of direction, working on that crossover step, working on dissociating the hips, so getting a hip rotation without a big torso rotation, which is absolutely essential in all sports and especially basketball.
Let's do it.
So for the dumbbell power skips, we're gonna go anywhere from a 10 pound dumbbell to a 50 pound dumbbell.
We've never had an athlete who needed more than 50 pounds because again, this is all about reactiveness, all about quickness off the floor.
So I generally go around 25 pounds for these.
So I'm gonna start high with the right foot.
I'm gonna go into the floor and it's gonna be a low skip right, high skip left.
So every time my left comes down and hits the floor, I get up as high as I can.
So it's right, low, left, high.
Right, low, left, high.
So your right foot
is just your recovery foot.
Your left leg is really the working leg here.
And then on the way back, I'm gonna switch it.
So now I start left high.
I'm gonna go left, low, right, get up.
Left, low, right, get up.
Key component here is the stiffness aspect.
As I'm going into that jump, I don't want the heel to collapse.
I gotta stay strong on the ball of the foot without the heel hitting the ground.
On the high jump,
I'm going to land at about a 45 degree angle and I'm going to push up from there.
So I don't want you striding out and getting really low.
I want you to produce high power with a short range of motion, just like we often have to do in a game off one foot.
So for our Peterson Step Up, so the classic old school exercise, it's called a Peterson Step Up.
Basically, we come down to tap that heel and we come to the forefoot.
So it's here and up, here and up.
We're going to add a band, so we're combining the Peterson Step Up with the TKE.
So if I'm working my right foot and I'm elevated on that small box or you could use like bumper plates or something that is small that we can elevate with, if you have an inclined slant board, that's even better.
So we would do that on the slant board.
So I'm gonna get some good tension on here and I'm coming up.
Now from here, I'm just going to come down and I can actually set that foot down a little bit so that I can focus on getting that knee out over the toe and coming to the ball of the foot.
And then I'm going to push back and then at the top I'm going to really squeeze that quad and we're really going to get that VMO nice and activated.
So it's here.
push-up, squeeze.
The exercise is slow and controlled and we should feel a very big burn in the quads.
Now if you get any type of knee pain, if you have patellar tendonitis, when we get that knee out over the toe in that position, it might be a little bit too much stress.
So we would skip this exercise and we would just go back to a normal supported TKE.
So I would not go elevated and I would not bring this foot up.
This would be my stable foot and then I would just come to the toe and bring it back and squeeze.
So you're not gonna feel any pain in the knee there.
It's just gonna be burn in the quad.
But with that Peterson step up,
If we can get an 8 or a 9 out of 10 burn in the quads with a 1 or a 2 out of 10 pain in the knee, then that's probably going to be a pretty good exercise for you.
I just don't want it to be a 4 out of 10, a 5 out of 10 pain in the knee.
Then we know we're putting excess stress on that patellar tendon.
All right, let's train hard.
Most importantly, we want to train smart.
Let's get it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just going to go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm going to sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
And I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for phase eight, day two and day five.
So this is our lower body strength day.
If we are in a rush, we can skip our foam roller circuit, do the dynamic warm up.
We can skip the Peterson step up, great exercise.
If you have any type of knee problems or you're prone to patellar tendonitis,
you could revert back to the TKEs, which I showed in the video.
The Peterson step up is a little higher stress to the knees, but that's also good for injury prevention if your knees can handle that stress.
Hang high pull.
Of course, we got to keep this exercise in there.
If you want to throw in a med ball high toss, a sandbag high toss, or something like that as an alternative, that's fine.
All that matters is that we're getting powerful triple extension.
The high pull gets us that, but there's other options there.
One leg RDL swing, definitely keep this exercise in.
Rear foot elevated split squat, this is our meat and potatoes heavy strength lift for the day.
You'll notice it's only three reps, so we're really after high intensity, max intent, and loading up heavy.
Nordic curl, do not skip that.
7-11 breathing, always do it.
Static stretch, if you're already flexible, we can skip that exercise.
Let's get it.
we're going to get through a foam roller circuit i have a long roller from skills you could do long or you could do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from skills online or you could just get it from walmart or target so the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll
so you could either go this way or you could go vertical so if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute now always if we want more pressure we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
the first thing we're going to do for our dynamic warm-up is stationary skips now for all of these you can take them on the move if you want for right now i'm just going to do them stationary just in case you don't have much room so we're just going up with the right up with the left just like we're running and vice versa on that other side all right i'm staying stiff with the feet so i'm not letting my heel collapse i want to stay on the ball of the foot
And I'm just going to go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're gonna go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch I'm just gonna go over with the left leg I'm gonna come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
Three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side Five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo.
I'm going lateral with one skip So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor Keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two, three.
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
Alright.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
one two three lean one two three heels back down one two three one up two up stand all right if you cannot get down in that deep position then let's just go as low as we can right here and then on the lean it's just gonna look like this all right and then we're gonna come back hopefully parallel to the floor one up two up stand we just got to get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower better range of motion so
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we've got to get them revved up for our session.
So for our Peterson Step Up, so the classic old school exercise, it's called a Peterson Step Up.
Basically, we come down to tap that heel and we come to the forefoot.
So it's here and up, here and up.
We're going to add a band, so we're combining the Peterson Step Up with the TKE.
So if I'm working my right foot and I'm elevated on that small box or you could use like bumper plates or something that is small that we can elevate with, if you have an inclined slant board, that's even better.
So we would do that on the slant board.
So I'm gonna get some good tension on here and I'm coming up.
Now from here, I'm just gonna come down and I can actually set that foot down a little bit so that I can focus on getting that knee out over the toe and coming to the ball of the foot.
And then I'm gonna push back and then at the top, I'm gonna really squeeze that quad and we're really gonna get that VMO nice and activated.
So it's here.
push up, squeeze.
The exercise is slow and controlled and we should feel a very big burn in the quads.
Now if you get any type of knee pain, if you have patellar tendonitis, when we get that knee out over the toe in that position, it might be a little bit too much stress.
So we would skip this exercise and we would just go back to a normal supported TKE.
So I would not go elevated and I would not bring this foot up.
This would be my stable foot and then I would just come to the toe and bring it back and squeeze.
So you're not gonna feel any pain in the knee there.
It's just gonna be burn in the quad.
But with that Peterson step up,
If we can get an 8 or a 9 out of 10 burn in the quads with a 1 or a 2 out of 10 pain in the knee, then that's probably going to be a pretty good exercise for you.
I just don't want it to be a 4 out of 10, a 5 out of 10 pain in the knee.
Then we know we're putting excess stress on that patellar tendon.
All right, let's train hard.
Most importantly, we want to train smart.
Let's get it.
So for my hang high pull, we can either use a trap bar or a barbell.
I would prefer a trap bar.
But if you don't have a trap bar, we could use a barbell.
So I'm going to go with a hook grip.
So that means I'm bringing my thumb around the bar and then I'm bringing my finger over that thumb.
Or some people like to go two fingers over that thumb.
That way it doesn't slip out of our hands.
So with my arm length, I like to go right around the seams.
on the barbell now a lot of you have longer arms you might want to go a little bit wider that's okay so I'm just going to deadlift it up all right now this is my base position notice I have a slight bend in the knee from there think about our RDL that we've been doing where we shift the hip backwards so I don't go down by bending my knees and if you do that by bending your knees you're actually going to
feel a little pain in your back.
So I want you to keep that initial knee bend, and then from there it's just hips back.
So I'm hinging from the hips.
Once that bar gets right above knee height, I'm exploding as hard as I can, and I'm just throwing this bar upwards.
like that, okay?
So I wanna end in this position.
Now, it's not a lift where we do the hinge, we come here, and then we lift with the upper body.
All of that momentum is coming from the lower body, transferring through the core into the upper body, so I need it to be fast and explosive.
so we're here and then boom finish high you finish on the toes like you're going to take off for a jump but your feet aren't going to actually leave the ground okay this is a advanced exercise now if you've been Olympic lifting you're probably familiar with brushing that bar so you can kind of hit it on the top of the thigh and pop up the majority of us we don't need to worry about that right now because that's going to take a long time to learn and it's going to hurt your thighs for a while in the process so
I'd rather you just think about getting to that good RDL position, that good hinge position, and then just exploding as hard as we can.
Only thing, if you're not going to brush and you're not going to hit the top of the thigh, I don't want you to bring the barbell out here.
I still need it to be on one line all the way up, close to the body.
If we get it out away from the body, we're probably going to feel it more in the lower back.
We're going to decrease our power output.
Now, there's a couple different options here.
After we finish, we can either just drop the barbell if you're in a gym that allows that and you have bumper plates, or you can actually catch it.
So catching it is higher stress to the body, but it's also good because you get a little eccentric work on the catch, so it's not a bad thing.
Personally, since I have the bumper plates, I prefer to rip as hard as I can, drop it, and then pick it back up and go from there.
Okay, now if you have a trap bar, it's going to be the same thing, except slight bend in the knees, hinge from the hips, go all the way until your knuckles are even with your knee, and then it's going to explode from there all the way up to the toes.
Toss that barbell up.
On the barbell, we would normally finish here.
With the trap bar, we finish here.
So the elbows go backwards instead of out to the side.
Now, if these are too advanced for you because this is several years of strength training before you should really be doing explosive hang high pulls, if that's the case, I want you to go hinge and explode to the toes.
So it's just hinge here.
explode to the toes, and then back to that slight bend in the knee, hinge, boom, explode to the toes.
You're really thinking about pulling the hips through, squeezing the glutes.
This is going to set a good foundation and really build towards that hang high pull.
All right, let's get it.
So for my one leg RDL swing, what I'm going to do is hold two dumbbells by my side, come to an RDL position.
So that's one leg, slight bend in the knee, of course, from there it's a hip hinge, we're not going down with the knee.
Once I get down to that bottom position, which right now is going to be hands past the knee, so the dumbbells are going to be about mid-shin for most of us.
If you're a little more tight, it's okay to just go down to your knees.
So I'm gonna get down to that position and then I'm gonna aggressively swing as fast as I can.
I'm gonna keep my elbow straight and I'm gonna swing the dumbbells up over my head.
I'm gonna bring it down while I'm still on one leg to challenge our stability and then bring that other foot down, bring the dumbbells back down, okay?
So it's slight bend.
RDL as fast as we can explode up to that top position do not think about doing an RDL and then a lift with the arms the arms are just swinging from the momentum of that aggressive explosive hip extension okay so it's here swing them stabilize at the top bring it down come all the way down
Now, this is a very advanced exercise, so if you don't have the stability to do it on one leg, I'd rather you come to a split stance.
So, if you did it in a split stance, we would be here in a little baby split.
My feet have to be pretty narrow, I can't be very wide, otherwise I'm going to hit the dumbbell on my leg.
Here, baby split.
From there, it's a hip hinge.
Notice I'm on the ball of the foot.
I'm not on my heel on that back leg, but I am on my heel on the front leg.
So it's gonna be here and then boom, explode.
Come back down and reset.
Boom.
explode, come back down, reset.
Now, if you're gonna do that single leg RDL, start very light, start five or 10 pound dumbbells in each hand.
Once you're good to go, then you can start to go up.
Most of our athletes don't get past 20 pounds.
20 pounds is a pretty good weight.
as far as really just utilizing that hip extension velocity, hamstring and glute, instead of using the arms.
If you start to get too heavy, you're going to feel like you're really working your arms to lift, alright?
So, start light, gradually go up, let's get it.
So for our rear foot elevated split squat, if you have a Smith machine, I advise that we use that.
It's one of the best things that we can do for the RFPSS simply because we have enough stability to where we can really get max intent.
We can load up the weight and get explosive without worrying about the balance factor.
So it's one of the best ways to build pure strength and power in the rear foot elevated.
If you don't have a Smith machine, I would rather not go barbell.
I would rather just go to dumbbells.
So we're gonna do the same thing, just with dumbbells as heavy as you can.
So for this rear foot elevated,
We are going to go balanced glute and quad.
So sometimes we go ankle underneath the knee.
That's going to be more glute.
Right now at that bottom position, when I got my rear foot up and I'm down on my knee, I want my knee directly over the toe.
So not beyond the toe.
I just want it right over that toe.
So that's the position that we're going to work with.
Of course, we would always start with just the bar, and then we would gradually load up heavier and heavier if we're feeling good.
So, unrack it, and then it's control down, tap that knee, explode up as hard as I can.
Now, if I'm loaded heavy, of course I'm not gonna be able to get up very fast.
It should be taking between half a second and a second to get from the bottom all the way to the top, but we have the intent to move that bar with a fast speed.
Okay, so we have two options for unracking that bar.
So the first option is what I just described where we get that position from there and then we go up and we unrack.
The other option is just to mark out maybe with a piece of tape or a weight where our toe will be and then I can lift up with two and then I can get that toe right where that piece of tape is and then I can go back from there.
With the Smith machine, we have the luxury of doing that since we have some stability, we don't have to worry about the balance as much.
So I can go here, and then I can work from there.
Now, if you have the dumbbells, you don't have that luxury, so I would rather see you start from the bottom up.
I would rather see the dumbbells be on the floor, and then we set up in our position, grab the dumbbells, and then we go from there.
All right, let's get after it.
So for our Nordic hamstring curls, if you have a partner, this is the easiest way to go.
So your partner is going to sit behind you and hold down your ankles.
Now he's got to push pretty hard because your whole body weight is going to be coming down.
So if he's light, then you're going to lift him up.
So he's got to put a little bit of force in there.
Now I like to use a foam roller.
So you put the front of your ankle on a foam roller, and then you kind of dig your toes into the ground.
And it's just a little bit more comfortable on the ankles.
Now, I know a lot of you guys don't have a partner.
So this is how we would do it without a partner.
I would set up a barbell and make sure it's nice and heavy.
Make sure you got weights on both sides.
If you have a rack, then put it on the inside of the rack and then you put a weighted plate on the other side so that the barbell is not going to roll.
If you don't have a rack, we would use the barbell and then we would put a weight behind it and we would put another 45 pound plate in front of it.
So it's still kind of trapped in there and it's not going to roll back and forth.
this is optional but i like to use this because it's a little bit softer so i just use a pad there and then you always need a pad
for your knees all right so this is your setup now from here a lot of people go tall and they come down i if you're super advanced that's fine i would rather see a little bit of hip flexion so we're initially in just a little bit of hip flexion and then from there we're going down i want you to go basically as slow as you can or four seconds all the way down this is a lowering exercise once i get to the bottom i'm going to push back up and i'm coming all the way back up pretty fast you don't have to go slow on the way up
so initial hip flexion from there i'm not bending the hips more i stay in this initial hip flexion and i slowly lower lower lower lower push off and come back up if you can get a light push off that's great a lot of you guys to start
you're going to have to really push off hard to get back up, otherwise you're going to get stuck halfway up.
So if you get extremely good at this, we can eventually either go a very light tap or there's some people who have such good strength to body weight ratios, they can just put their hands behind their back and do the whole thing.
Now, you might cramp up on this exercise if you're not used to this intense of a hamstring contraction.
It's a very hard hamstring contraction.
So if you cramp, then stretch it out.
Try to get back into it, but this might be a little bit too advanced and your hamstrings aren't quite used to it yet.
So just try to make it easier or come up with an alternative if you continue to cramp.
Now the other mistake that people make is they point the toes and they go from there.
A lot of times your calf will start to cramp when you're in that position.
So I like to go toes kind of straight down into the ground.
So I'm digging into the ground and then I get a lot less in the calf and I really just feel it straight through the hamstrings, through the glutes and then you should feel a little bit through the low back as well.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breaths.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
So if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we want to do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
And I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down to the elbows and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off, and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for phase nine, day one and day four.
So always do our dynamic warm up if you want to skip that foam roller circuit you can.
If we have to skip anything today, just skip the one-two push out and the hip swivel back pedal.
So take out the agility and do everything else on today's program.
Of course, we want to do those agility drills, but if you're really short on time, cut those two out.
We are on this six day a week program, so four days of lower body, which means by nature, our workouts need to be short and more efficient.
If we're in the gym for longer than an hour with this workout, you're doing too much, you should probably be cutting out some of these drills.
This entire workout should probably only take you around 45 minutes, so you should be able to get in and get a good high intensity session and get out and start your recovery process because we gotta recover for tomorrow's lower body workout.
Let's do it.
So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we can cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one, we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's going to be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed.
So we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid shin or even to the knees just as low as we can.
But we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch, so I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight, and I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat
and i'm getting nice and low touch the floor and i'm popping out to that other side all right so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's gonna be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
one two three lean one two three heels back down one two three one up two up stand all right if you cannot get down in that deep position then let's just go as low as we can right here and then on the lean it's just going to look like this
All right, and then we're going to come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up stand.
We just got to get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's going to be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're going to get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
and now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult, but if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for our one-two push out, I just like to go on the lane line.
So we're looking at about 18 feet from baseline to the free throw line.
If you're not on a court, just mark out about 18 to 20 feet and let's work with that.
So if I'm going to my left, I need to lead with my left leg.
So I go over the line or if you have like rings or agility ladder or something, it's here, here,
here, here.
So we're pushing over the line and we're pushing back.
So it's left, right, left, right.
But when that right foot hits, now we push laterally as far as we can.
So it's left, right, left, right.
Land, left, right, left, right.
left, right, left, right.
Alright, you're pushing as far as you can with that right foot.
Now once I get down to that side, I would bring it back the other way.
So then it would be the other way, right, left, right, left, right, left, push, right, left, right, left,
right left right left alright so there's a lot of rhythm working on that pure quickness most importantly we're working on that punch out so boom punching when we slam the floor like that we really involve the tendons instead of just the muscles so I don't want it to be get the foot here and then a soft push out I want you to slam the floor and push out aggressively let's do it
So for my bound sprints, what I'm going to do, if you have a court and a half, then we're going to go a full court and a half with the bound sprint.
We're going to bound six times, three each leg, get as far as we can.
And then after that six, one, boom, hit the ground running, sprint it through a court and a half.
Now I know a lot of you guys don't have two courts set up this way.
So what you're going to do is just 54 meters.
So you could
Mark it out on a track or on a field or anywhere where you have 54 meters.
Look, if you don't have that space, it's okay.
Let's just do the bounds to half court or six times, which will get you around half court and then sprint it through the other half court, all right?
So, work with what you've got, but if you have the room, I'm going to start in a split stance, and I'm getting out as far as I can.
Of course, on my bounds, I do want to get some height with it, and I got to get off the ground quick, quick, quick.
So, it's going to be boom, one, two, three, four, five, six,
sprint it out as fast as we can through the rest of that 54 meters.
Main goals of this exercise is to get as far as we can with the bounds and then to get from point A to point B as fast as we possibly can.
So time yourself every session.
I want you to beat that record.
So for my lateral bound with dumbbell punch, I'm going to go with the light dumbbell.
Most of you will go five, maybe up to 10 pounds.
So I'm just going to go a lateral bound.
So you guys know the regular lateral bound.
But now I'm going to go opposite.
So as I push out and as I land on that left leg, I'm punching across.
with this dumbbell and i'm trying to do it pretty forcefully so the harder i punch with the dumbbell the more force i got going down in the ground the more i have to absorb with this left leg and then the more i have to redirect and push in that direction so you'll notice with the dumbbell it's a punch
and then it's a pull.
So a punch, and then I pull it to the side of my chest, and now all that additional force for absorption and redirection is on that left leg.
So I'll give you a slow motion here.
It's bam, push, absorb, push, absorb, push, absorb, push.
Notice I'm not just going with the arm, I'm actually dipping the shoulder.
So I'm getting a little bit of rotational power in there.
So it's rotation, drive out, rotation, drive out.
Now this exercise takes a lot of coordination and a lot of timing.
If we can't get that down with the dumbbell, it's okay to just go with no weights and just use your hand and do it in the same way.
That reach is still beneficial because
We got to be able to stabilize that knee when our upper body is rotating, right?
Because that's where a lot of injuries happen on the court.
It's not when we're in this perfect posture, it's when we're in these positions and we're rotating with our upper body and we have rotational forces.
That's when a lot of knee injuries happen.
So we got to get used to being able to absorb and explode while our upper body is moving in space.
So for our box drop med ball toss, we're going to hold a med ball.
Now work with what you've got.
So I like to go 20 up to about 30 pounds here.
If you have lighter, that's okay because we are getting a drop from the box.
So we're getting some good eccentric loading.
I like to go in a box around knee height or just below knee height.
Now, if you're not as advanced, go in a smaller box with a lighter weight.
If you're more advanced, we can start to raise that box up.
I wouldn't go too much higher than knee height for this exercise though.
So all I'm gonna do is just hold it here, right in front of my belly button.
I'm gonna drop down.
As soon as my feet land, I end up arms extended, and then I gotta transition out of the bottom as fast as I can, toss as high as I can.
So it's drop,
load up toss as high as we can we will get a little bit of a jump naturally but I don't want you to consciously think about jumping so you might come to your toes and leave the ground just a couple inches all I want you to really think about is transitioning from eccentric to concentric as fast as you can and tossing this ball as high as you possibly can every rep compete with yourself try to get it higher and higher and higher
Now, of course, anytime we're throwing something overhead, we got to make sure that we get out of the way.
So don't be distracted and throw it up and have it come down and hit you in the head.
It's very dangerous.
So throw it up, step out of the way, keep your eye on it the whole time so that you can see it drop.
Make sure nobody else is in the way because it could be very dangerous if you're throwing this in a super crowded place.
If you're in a gym that's way too crowded to do this, I want you to just jump with it.
So we're just going to hold a light medicine ball right by the chest, or you can even hug it.
Sometimes I like to hug it here, cross the arms, and then just drop, land, and jump.
So that's your option if you're in a place that's too crowded to actually throw it overhead.
Let's do it.
Now for our freestyle dunks, I put this in there because it's so important that you get out there and just allow your body to explore different approaches, different type of dunks, different type of jumping styles without me always trying to put you in a box and trying to get you to do one thing.
So I want you to set the clock for 10 minutes and I just want you to go get as many dunks as you can.
Take breaks in between if you need to.
I do want you to be recovered in between reps.
This isn't an endurance workout.
So get up off one foot.
Throw it down.
Walk back.
Recover for 30 seconds to a minute.
Come back in.
Take off off two.
Try to dunk left.
Whatever you want to do, get creative and do it.
Of course, if you can't dunk and all you can do is touch the bottom of the net, I don't care.
I still want you to get creative.
Come in off two and touch the net.
Come from baseline, get up off one and touch the net.
Try to jump off left, touch with the left.
Variability, variety is the key to longevity and it's super important for building kind of well-rounded explosiveness and athleticism.
and so I want you to get creative, set the clock for 10 minutes, and just freestyle dunk.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breaths.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I gotta get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's OK.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just going to go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm going to sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
And I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't gonna be able to get our heel all the way to the floor, that's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for phase nine, day two and day five.
So this is our lower body strength day, already very efficient.
Definitely skip the foam roller circuit if you're short on time.
Always do the lateral step core stiffness.
All of these next exercises we have to do.
If you have to skip one of the strength exercises, you could skip the band stability ball hamstring curl.
Love that exercise.
But if you're short on time, cut that out.
And then if you're short on time, cut out the rear foot elevated foot pops.
So that one is a lower priority.
Very great for building strength in the ankle and in the foot and building that functional stiffness that we need.
But if you're short on time, cut that out.
And then of course, if you're short on time, cut out that static stretch.
Let's do it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
so you could either go this way or you could go vertical so if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute now always if we want more pressure we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh so i'm getting my whole quad in this one and if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee then start here and finish and then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee
Our next one is going to be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping, we gotta really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary, just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch, so I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight, and I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
Three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that
stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip and now I land I turn this foot forward I pivot I'm here knee a couple inches off the floor I'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one two
Three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here.
We need it back behind the head and stand.
All right.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
one two three lean one two three heels back down one two three one up two up stand all right if you cannot get down in that deep position then let's just go as low as we can right here and then on the lean it's just gonna look like this all right and then we're gonna come back hopefully parallel to the floor one up two up stand we just got to get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower better range of motion
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for my lateral step core stiffness, what I'm gonna do is use a cable machine.
I'm gonna get that cable set at around hip height.
Now if you don't have a cable machine, you could just do these with a band, get it around something stable, around hip height.
Either one will work, but I like to use a cable machine because we can load up a little heavier.
So of course, as always, we start very light.
Once we feel comfortable, we gradually go up.
I like to go around 80, 90, up to 100 pounds.
So I'm going to go feet pretty close together.
So I'm maybe hip width, shoulder width apart here.
Already I should feel like it's really pulling me in.
Now I'm just going to take a little step.
with this left foot and as soon as that foot hits i'm landing with that 90 degree knee angle and then i'm keeping my core stiff and i'm pushing out of it all right so so many of you what you're going to do is you're going to step and then you're going to have this torso collapse you got to keep in mind a lot of the battle on lateral movements right if i'm changing direction is that core stiffness
So if I get here and I go to change directions and I deform from the core, we lose milliseconds on that change of direction.
So what I want you to focus on is keeping that stiff core.
As soon as that foot hits, I do not collapse at all and I can just push right back out.
Alright, so it's feet together, it's here, short ground contact time and just push up out of it.
It's got to be fast, it's got to be rapid.
We are going to feel a burn in the leg, but we should also feel it in the core, especially in that outside oblique.
So for our eccentric overloaded one leg RDL, what I'm going to do is just deadlift the weight up.
So I want to choose a weight that I couldn't normally do single leg deadlifts with.
So I'm just going to do bilateral, so double leg on the way up, a normal deadlift.
This part should be the easy part.
Now from here, I'm just coming to one leg.
All right, so slight bend in the knee.
We don't need to be completely stiff with it.
Slight bend in the knee.
From there, it's just a hip hinge.
I'm not bending my knee anymore.
And I'm coming down slow about three.
seconds and just put it down on the floor.
Now if you don't have that range of motion you could always use bumper plates or some sort of blocks and we could put it down on the blocks and then pick it back up with two feet.
So then again I'm coming two feet back to that right foot slight bend in that knee and nice and slow three seconds on the way down.
So the key here is if you choose a weight that you could easily just do normal RDL's with that's not actually overloading the eccentric.
So we have to choose a weight that we normally wouldn't be able to just rep out RDLs.
Now, some people balance is the limiting factor.
So if balance is the limiting factor and it's not necessarily strength, I would rather see you just go in a split stance, so a slight split, and keep all the weight on this front leg just like we would in a single leg RDL, but keep this back foot down for some support.
So I'm just gonna come down on this back toe so I can deadlift it up.
And I can just put that foot down a little bit for support.
I am not putting my weight back.
All my weight is still on that front leg and I'm doing the same thing.
Alright, so that version is great.
It'll actually allow us to use a little bit more weight and we can be on balance.
But some of you guys are more advanced to where you can really load up heavy and get a good single leg RDL without balance being the limiting factor.
Now keep in mind with that single leg RDL it is a hip hinge so I'm pushing my butt back back back.
I'm keeping my back completely flat.
I do not want to have any type of rounded spine.
Also with that back leg I can keep that knee relaxed a little bit.
Sometimes people try to go straight with that leg and it might limit the overall range of motion.
I'd rather see you have sort of a relaxed leg where we're almost straight but we do have a little bend in the knee.
And then I want to kick this heel nice and high.
So as I go down, that leg is getting kicked up, up, up.
So that thigh should really be parallel with your torso.
So as you go down, I don't want that thigh to hang out down here.
I want it to be up in that position.
And we're thinking about driving that heel up towards the ceiling.
So for our TKE rear foot elevated split squat, I'm gonna pull up a bench and I'm gonna go dumbbells on the floor.
Now, if you don't have the bench, that's okay.
We can always just make this into a reverse lunge instead.
But if you do have the bench, we want something just below knee height.
All right, so I'm gonna get in the band.
Now I'm gonna make sure that it's right behind the knee.
Typically a thicker band does better here, a thicker, stronger band.
But if you just have the thin bands, that's okay.
Just step back further to get more tension.
So when I'm in this setup position with my rear foot elevated, I should already feel a good pull here.
So I have to really activate my quad, my VMO, just to stay stable in this position, right?
If it's too loose, then there's no point in even having that band.
So get that perfect amount of tension and then come down to the floor.
pick up our dumbbells and now it's a rear foot elevated split squat.
So I'm going all the way down and all the way back up.
Now at that bottom position, I do want the knee just over the toe.
So this isn't our typical rear foot elevated where our knee is going to stay back behind the toe.
We are going to get a little bit of a forward shin angle so that knee is going to end up just in front of the toe.
And now we're really going to make it quad dominant because we have this band pulling at the top, so we're getting extra VMO activation.
That's that small teardrop muscle.
So at the top I get a good squeeze in the quad, especially that teardrop muscle.
and I'm going through my normal rear foot elevated, all right?
So you probably won't feel much in the glutes or the hamstrings.
You're gonna feel everything in the quad.
On this exercise, we're trying to bulletproof the quads, which means bulletproof in the knees, getting the knees nice and resilient with this exercise.
So if you didn't have the bench, that's okay.
We could just do a reverse lunge.
So I'm gonna do the same exact thing.
I'm gonna step back,
and I'm getting back up.
I'm going to squeeze up at that top position.
As always, start body weight, gradually go up.
We do want to load as heavy as we possibly can once the form is down and everything is right.
Just because it's a TKE quad focus exercise doesn't mean that this is something where we're just going to go light.
We do want to progressively overload and get as heavy as we can with those dumbbells.
Let's get it.
so for my band stability ball hamstring curl if we have some thin bands we can put one around a power rack or something nice and stable i actually like to link together two of them if you don't have this band i'm going to show you the alternative at the end of this video so if we have it i'm going to put my feet up on the stability ball i'm going to get
the band right around my midfoot.
Now, I got to stay in dorsiflexion, so I got to keep my toes back towards my head.
And the good thing about this is we're getting a lot of that anterior tibialis work, so that muscle right along the shin.
We're going to really work that muscle here.
So I want to start with some light tension on the band.
I don't want it to be completely slack.
So I'm here.
Now I'm gonna bridge up nice and flat like a bridge, squeeze the glutes, pull the toes back towards the head, and then it's just a hamstring curl.
So I'm being resisted on the way back and I'm controlling on the eccentric.
So we should feel a big burn in the hamstrings.
We will also feel a little bit of a burn in the calves, but especially on the front of that shin, on those shin muscles.
Now, if you do not have the band, then version one is just a regular Swiss ball curl.
We can really work the same way there, just without the band.
But a lot of you guys, that'll be a little bit too easy.
So you would come to one leg and I would bridge up and I would go single leg curls.
Now, if that one is a little too hard, but the double leg is a little too easy, I could go supported.
So I just put that foot down.
I do not have my weight on that left leg.
My weight is still all on that right leg, but it's just for a little bit of support.
and then I'm working there.
Make sure on all these variations, we keep the hips up flat like a bridge the entire time.
If that hip starts to sag, then we get some good work in the hamstrings, but we take all that tension off of the glutes.
All right, let's get it.
So for our rear foot elevated foot pops, we're gonna take a big step forward, normal rear foot elevated position.
If you wanna curl the toe, that's fine.
I like to point the toe so the top of my foot is down on that bench.
Now from here, I want pretty much a vertical shin, so I don't wanna have a steep shin angle here.
Vertical shin, I'm gonna come to the ball of my foot, okay?
You could do this barefoot or you could do it in shoes.
Heel is going to be off the ground, and then from there, I'm at like maybe 60 to 90 degree knee angle.
From there, I'm just popping that foot up and down as quick as I can, and I can never let that heel touch the ground.
You're going to feel a huge burn through the calves.
We're co-contracting all of those ankle muscles.
Those intrinsic foot muscles are getting fired up, so we're really training that entire lower leg for strength, stability, and stiffness.
Now, pay attention to the rep range.
I do not want you to count reps, so this exercise is for time.
Set the timer or have a friend time you and get in as many ground contacts as you can.
Get that foot moving as many as we can in that time frame.
Let's do it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they were in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we want to do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you wanna reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
and I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm going to pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull
this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't gonna be able to get our heel all the way to the floor, that's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for phase nine, day three and day six.
So this is our core and mobility day.
As you can see, don't need to cut out anything.
Very short, very efficient workout.
Since we're at six days a week, we can't have these long core and mobility workouts.
We would rather just get in, get it done in 20, 30 minutes, and get out of the gym because we need to recover for the next day.
If you have to cut anything back, just cut from four sets down to three sets, all right?
But don't cut out any exercises.
All of these exercises are absolutely essential.
Let's get it.
So for our leg raises, you're gonna go on a Roman chair if you have it.
If not, then you can just hang on a normal pull-up bar.
Either one will work just fine.
So if I'm in the Roman chair, I'm gonna get set up here.
Now, you guys are used to doing a full knee raise.
That bottom half is really more hip flexors.
The top half, from here,
to here to as high as I can get that knee is going to be abs, especially those lower abdominals.
So what I got to think about is a posterior pelvic tilt.
So if this is an anterior pelvic tilt, posterior is the opposite.
Think about like I have a tail.
Think about tucking that tail.
That motion of posterior pelvic tilt is what's going to really activate those abdominals.
So I'm here.
and I got to posteriorly tilt, think about getting my knees as high as I can, and then back down halfway.
So that is how we actually train the abs instead of just working the hip flexors.
So for our leg raises, you can either go in a Roman chair like this if you have it, if not, then we're just gonna hang from a regular pull-up bar.
So for my ankle toe crawls, what I'm going to do is get in a half kneeling position.
I'm going to work on my ankle dorsiflexion by driving my knee as far as I can over the toe.
And then I'm going to flow straight into my toe stretch.
So I got to get this knee down to the floor while keeping my big toe and my other four toes down on the ground.
So I'm here.
Now look at that position that I'm in with the toe.
So I'm challenging my toe mobility.
So what I'm going to do is just crawl in this position and I can do anywhere from four to eight reps each leg.
So I'm going to start at four.
So I'm here.
nice and slow, look how I crawl the hand forward, and then I ground that next foot, drive the knee over the toe, and gradually transition, all right?
So I'm literally just crawling, and I'm challenging my ankle mobility,
and my toe mobility as I go.
So this is essential when it comes to getting shin angles.
So you guys hear me talk a lot about the most explosive athletes have good shin angles.
If you can get horizontal shin angles, we produce more horizontal force, which means we get somewhere faster, right?
So horizontal force production is essential, but
If you get here and you lock up, right, because you don't have the ankle mobility or you have the ankle mobility but you don't have the toe mobility, we can't get that shin angle.
So now we have vertical shins.
I don't care how much force you produce with vertical shins, you can't get horizontal.
So half the battle is how much force we produce.
The other half of the battle is the angle that we're producing the force.
And so that's why we're training
This ankle mobility, you see how I got to be able to get my knee far out over my toe, which takes dorsiflexion range of motion.
But as I extend this hip, I need to have that toe range of motion.
If that toe locks up, then I don't get full extension of the hip.
So we need that dorsiflexion and we need that toe range of motion so that we can get these good shin angles and get full triple extension on our first step explosiveness.
So we're going to do anywhere from four to eight reps, and we can do anywhere from two to four sets.
Do this a couple days a week, up to three days a week.
This is a good one that you can just add to your warm-ups.
You could add this to your dynamic warm-ups, or if you're at home and you're bored watching TV, it's a great exercise to do just to challenge that ankle mobility and that toe mobility.
Let's get it.
So for our lateral oblique crunch, there's a lot of different ways we can do this.
If you have something to hold down your feet, or you have a partner to hold your feet down, then just go in a stacked position.
and we can just go on a BOSU ball.
So you'd put your hip directly on the center of that BOSU ball, and then I would come fully extended.
So you could either cross your arms or just keep your arms here, or you could bring one arm here and one arm across the chest.
I like to do that option a lot of times.
So in this position now, I have my whole torso hanging over the BOSU, and I'm just gonna come into a little lateral crunch, all right?
So it's a small range motion.
but I'm really getting a good workout on that top oblique, so my left oblique is fired up right now.
Now, I know a lot of you guys don't have a BOSU ball, so there's some other options.
We could go on a bench and get our torso off the bench, have a partner hold down our legs and do the same thing, or we could go on a hyperextension machine
and come in that way so that our feet are anchored.
And same thing, my body is now hanging off so I can do the same exact thing.
Actually, in this position, I could even hold a dumbbell if that's too easy and still get that good oblique work.
Now, if none of those setups work for you, then just go to a cable.
Bring it down to the lowest setting and we can just do a side crunch like this.
So any of those options work.
All we're looking for is a big workout, a big burn in those side obliques.
If the rep range is too easy for you, then go ahead and add reps.
We want to go pretty much to a maximal burn on this exercise.
Let's do it.
So for my single leg supported rotations, what I'm going to do is step in front of a bench.
If you don't have a bench, you can actually put your back foot on a wall and get the sole flat to the wall just for a little added stability.
Now if your stability is very good, you could just do this on one leg.
But for most of you guys, I want you doing it assisted and we can actually get a little more mobility if it is assisted.
So take a big step forward.
I'm going to throw my back foot up.
Instead of pointing the toe like I normally would for a rear foot elevated, I'm curling that toe.
If you have a band, pull that band tight and get it up above the head or any type of light dowel would work.
Slight bend in that front knee and now I hinge from the hips and from here I'm just rotating as far as I can and then back to neutral.
and as far as i can the other way and back to neutral okay i'm going to feel that stretch all through the hips lateral portion of the hips medial portion of the hips my upper back and my shoulder my thoracic spine i'm getting a lot of really good mobility so we should feel this a little bit throughout the entire body we're really mobilizing the entire body and getting some stability at the same time let's do it
So for my rolling cross touch, what I'm going to do is I'm just going to bring my feet off the ground and I'm going to bring my hands off the ground so I'm in this hollow body position.
I don't want to have an excessive curve in the lower back, so I want to think about tilting my pelvis, pretend like you have a tail, and think about tucking that tail so your back is nice and flat to the floor.
And then from there, I'm just rolling.
So my feet still aren't going to touch the ground.
My hands are still not going to touch the ground.
I'm going to roll over.
I'm going to roll over again.
So I end up in the same position and then I'm going to go cross body.
So when I roll that way, I'm going to go left hand touches the right toe and back down.
And again, left hand, right toe back down.
And then I roll back to the other side.
So now I'll end up in the same position.
Now, once I'm back here, I go right hand left.
So right hand, left toe.
And then again, I roll back to the other side.
So the reason that we are rolling is it is one of the most fundamental movement patterns that humans have and we lose it over time.
But when we roll, we're training so many core muscles and we're training them reactively.
It is a training stimulus for the core that we can't get with any traditional core exercise.
So it's really building up that core stability and it's building it up naturally and reflexively which is really going to carry over to all of our athletic movements.
For the hip flexor tilt, I'm just gonna use a box of bench or a chair.
I'm gonna get my back foot up so the top of my foot is on the bench.
I'm not gonna go with my toe on the bench.
Top of the foot on the bench, I'm just gonna come down.
Now I wanna get my heel touching my hips or as close as I can get to that.
If you have a pad, that'd be better.
I wouldn't do this on hardwood.
Make sure you got a nice, soft surface.
So I'm touching.
I'm in a straight line from my knee all the way up through my shoulders.
And I'm just going to sit here.
First, I'm going to get in a good position.
This ankle should be under that knee.
I should already feel a little bit of a stretch in that hip flexor, a little bit in the quad as well.
Now from here, I'm getting nice and wide.
I'm not going to lean forward.
And I'm going arms out.
and together now at the top with straight elbows not bent elbows at the top I'm going to lean towards the lead leg so that's to my right as far as I can
hold for five, and then come right back, okay?
And then we're hands down, all the way up, hands together, nice and tall, elongate through the spine, and lean towards that lead leg.
Three, two, one, back down, and we're back through.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for phase 10, day one and day four.
So this is our lower body strength day.
As you can see, already very short and efficient.
We probably shouldn't have to cut anything out here.
Now, just because it is short and efficient doesn't mean that it's easy.
It is very high intensity.
So these rear foot elevated split squats.
Alright, six sets of two.
So you might see two and think that it's easy, but two means that, of course, we're max intensity.
So we're gonna be loaded up, very heavy, and six sets is quite a lot.
Make sure you're taking plenty of rest time in between.
We want full recovery.
Now if you have any type of knee problems, patellar tendonitis, anything like that, that might be too intense, so you could go back to another hip dominant exercise, a deadlift or something else, but we still want to get that high intensity just in a pain-free zone, so find an exercise that you're pain-free.
Full range of motion RDL, so four sets of five.
This is not gonna be maximally loaded.
We're more so going for full range of motion.
So for some of you guys, that's gonna be a normal RDL, just full range.
For some of you, we're actually gonna elevate on a box
or a bumper plate, and we're getting that max range, I want you guys to start to strengthen in that end range.
That's where most injuries happen, is at our near end range of that muscle length, so that's why we're going full range of motion there.
The mini band ankle inversion, eversion, definitely don't skip that.
One leg functional calf raise, if you have to skip one, this is the one to take out, but definitely try to leave it in, it's a very good exercise.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll.
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh so i'm getting my whole quad in this one and if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee then start here and finish and then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee
Our next one is going to be for the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside of the top of the knee all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I want to stay on the ball of the foot.
And I'm just going to go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
Maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go over with the left leg.
I'm gonna come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees.
Just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch, so I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight, and I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles, and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral, and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I wanna get that
stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor i'm going back with the hip like i would in a normal squat and i'm getting nice and low touch the floor and i'm popping out to that other side all right so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor
Same thing with the skip and now I land I turn this foot forward I pivot I'm here knee a couple inches off the floor I'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
one two three lean one two three heels back down one two three one up two up stand all right if you cannot get down in that deep position then let's just go as low as we can right here and then on the lean it's just gonna look like this all right and then we're gonna come back hopefully parallel to the floor one up two up stand we just got to get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower better range of motion so
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction.
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for our rear foot elevated split squat, if you have a Smith machine, I advise that we use that.
It's one of the best things that we can do for the RFPSS simply because we have enough stability to where we can really get max intent.
We can load up the weight and get explosive without worrying about the balance factor.
So it's one of the best ways to build pure strength and power in the rear foot elevated.
If you don't have a Smith machine, I would rather not go barbell.
I would rather just go to dumbbells.
So we're going to do the same thing, just with dumbbells as heavy as you can.
So for this rear foot elevated,
We are going to go balanced glute and quad.
So sometimes we go ankle underneath the knee.
That's going to be more glute.
Right now at that bottom position, when I got my rear foot up and I'm down on my knee, I want my knee directly over the toe.
So not beyond the toe.
I just want it right over that toe.
So that's the position that we're going to work with.
Of course, we would always start with just the bar, and then we would gradually load up heavier and heavier if we're feeling good.
So unrack it, and then it's control down, tap that knee, explode up as hard as I can.
Now if I'm loaded heavy, of course I'm not gonna be able to get up very fast.
It should be taking between half a second and a second to get from the bottom all the way to the top, but we have the intent to move that bar with a fast speed.
Okay, so we have two options for unracking that bar.
So the first option is what I just described where we get that position from there and then we go up and we unrack.
The other option is just to mark out maybe with a piece of tape or a weight where our toe will be and then I can lift up with two and then I can get that toe right where that piece of tape is and then I can go back from there.
With the Smith machine, we have the luxury of doing that since we have some stability, we don't have to worry about the balance as much.
So I can go here, and then I can work from there.
Now, if you have the dumbbells, you don't have that luxury, so I would rather see you start from the bottom up.
I would rather see the dumbbells be on the floor, and then we set up in our position, grab the dumbbells, and then we go from there.
All right, let's get after it.
So for our full range of motion RDLs, what I'm going to do is I can either use a barbell or if you have a trap bar, that's even better.
So I'm going to show you guys with the barbell.
So I would go with my alternating grip just outside hip width.
So for my first rep, I want to do a normal deadlift up.
Now from here, for an RDL, we want a slight bend in the knee.
From there, I am not bending my knees anymore.
From there, it's just a hip hinge.
So I'm essentially just pushing my hips backwards as I go into this RDL.
So I'm bringing the bar close down my body, all right?
Full range all the way, and back up, okay?
Notice that I was able to get to the floor, so I'm probably not at my maximal range of motion.
For a lot of you guys, the majority of you guys, you are full range and you won't quite be able to touch the floor, so that's fine.
But for somebody who has that range of motion, we actually wanna go elevated.
So first progression, I would just stand on one bumper plate.
For me, I've been doing these a while, so I'm gonna actually stand on two bumper plates, make sure we're nice and stable there.
And then, as always, I'm going to deadlift it up.
Same thing, same form.
RDL.
Now notice I can get a lot lower to the point where I can't quite reach the floor.
Alright, so it's the same form.
I'm going to get a huge stretch.
in the hamstrings at that bottom position, all right?
Now, common mistakes is people start getting competitive and start pushing for more range of motion, and to do that, they start rounding their back.
We do not wanna round the back.
I wanna keep spinal integrity, so I want to keep that neutral spine
where I can keep my back completely straight all the way through.
We're getting all of that range of motion just through the hips.
Now because of the added range of motion, you're going to want to start very light.
So start with the barbell, maybe go up to 25s on each side and then 35s on each side.
Most of you guys aren't going to need much more than 45 pounds on each side.
Some of you guys are super strong.
You can progress past that point.
Majority of you guys are going to be fine with this.
Keep in mind, this is not an exercise that creates a huge burn, but the next day you're going to be very sore.
This exercise is known for causing delayed onset muscle soreness.
Two days after you're probably still going to be pretty sore from this because that eccentric is so long and slow and the range of motion is so big.
We're getting a lot of those microscopic tears in the muscle fibers.
So great exercise but it's going to cause a lot of soreness.
So do not load up too heavy your first session.
Let's make gradual improvements.
So for our miniband inversion, eversion, what I'm gonna do is get this miniband sort of around the ball of the foot or around midfoot, and I'm just gonna space it out so I have a little bit of tension there.
Now if your miniband is super light and you don't have a stronger one, then you're gonna go even further out to get more tension on it.
So for me, I got pretty good tension.
So I'm going maybe a little more narrow than shoulders width apart.
Now from here, most of you guys are used to the windshield wipers.
So that's abduction adduction.
But what we want to do is actually turn the soles of the feet in and then the soles of the feet out.
It's going to be a small range of motion.
But what I mean is this.
So I'm dropping the soles of the feet in and then I'm pushing the soles of the feet out as far as I can.
out and with that inwards movement naturally you're gonna get some adduction so the toes are gonna point towards each other so it is sort of like your typical windshield wiper but we want to think about this movement instead of this movement so what we're doing with this exercise we're really strengthening up the ankles we're strengthening up the sides of the shins now think about how you sprain an ankle with an inversion sprain
that foot is coming to the inside.
So that's what we want to get here is we want to get there and then we're pushing against resistance to get it back.
So we're strengthening up all of those, the muscles on that lateral aspect of the ankle, the foot, the shin, so that we can really help reduce the risk of sprained ankles.
But also it's good because when we go to jump, we need good co-contraction around the ankle so that we're nice and stable.
This is a major key for one foot jumping.
Let's do it.
So for the one leg functional calf raise, you can either do this barefoot or you could use shoes.
Ideally, if you're in a good situation, go barefoot.
So find either a stair, a step, or a weight.
Make sure that weight is heavy so that it doesn't fly up at you.
And you're gonna go ball of the foot on.
So about half of your foot is gonna be on that edge
You're going to hold on to something for support.
I don't want you trying this without support just yet.
We're going to stand on one leg.
Instead of a normal calf raise where it's just the ankle, we're going to get the knee and the hip involved.
So it's almost like a quarter squat.
So like a partial squat, and then you finish with the calf raise.
Okay, so it's here.
Finish high with the calf raise.
You've got to explode up on your toes.
So it's squat, press, squat, press, squat, press.
Notice this other leg is driving, just like in a single leg vertical jump.
So we're back with that left leg, drive with the left leg.
Back with the left leg, drive with the left leg.
Notice I'm focusing on stiffness here with this foot.
So as I go down, I'm not letting it collapse.
I'm keeping it completely even with that ledge.
keep it even keep it stiff and then at the top drive up as high as we can okay so sometimes it is good to isolate with normal calf raises but this is a much more functional way of doing it and this teaches our glutes and our quads and our hamstrings to send energy down through the calves and then down through the feet to reach the floor to actually produce power that we need in the vertical jump so normally this exercise should just be body weight especially for phase one but some of our pros uh
More of our advanced athletes, we will go weighted vest.
You could go 10, 15, 20 pound weighted vest, but still hold on for support.
Not necessary, but if you are advanced, you can use that weighted vest up front.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breaths.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you can do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips, keeping my back nice and straight.
If you wanna reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe, you can, but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back.
So I like to just keep my hands here to make sure that I'm not rounding the upper back.
And I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for day two and day five of phase 10.
So this is our plyo and agility day.
Now keep in mind, since we are back to back, right, yesterday we had our lower body strength workout, if you have knee problems, you're gonna wanna space this by a day.
You're probably gonna wanna go down to three days a week, so you would do your strength Monday, do this workout Wednesday, and then do your strength again Friday.
And then the next week you could flip it.
So you can do this workout Monday and Friday and the strength workout Wednesday.
For most of us, we're good to go and we're highly trained by this point.
We're used to this higher frequency, the more days per week, and so we should be fine.
But if you're waking up and your joints are sore, your knees are sore, then you might want to push this back a day.
Do not plow through the program.
Music freestyle agility, do not skip this.
I really want you guys to hit that.
If you're gonna skip anything, it would be the lateral med ball toss and the med ball acceleration change of direction.
Great exercises, but I understand it takes time and it takes a wall and a med ball, so some of you guys aren't gonna have the resources, so you can skip those if you have to.
High box depth jump.
This is the potent stimulus for the day.
This is gonna lead to probably our best vertical jump gains, but also with that comes higher stress.
So a high box depth jump is higher stress to the knees.
So if you're prone to knee injuries or patellar tendonitis, this is one that we're gonna have to scale back and listen to your body.
Rear foot elevated stiffness jump.
If you have the time and the energy, let's definitely do this.
Great exercise for building that elasticity.
If you don't have the time, it's okay to skip that.
20 minute dunk session, have to do it.
So the mandatory ones for this day is the music freestyle agility.
the high box depth jump as long as your knees are healthy, and the 20-minute dunk session.
If you get those three things, we're getting everything that we need.
These other ones are just extra credit that I advise you get if you do have the time.
So we're gonna get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're gonna focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one is going to be for the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside of the top of the knee all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just gonna really dig into that heel.
So I'm gonna apply some pressure in there.
I'm gonna go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day.
We're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs, so I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand, and then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed so we're not all out we're just getting that blood flowing we're gonna go for 30 seconds for the over under hamstring stretch i'm just gonna go over with the left leg i'm gonna come down touch the toe now if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back then just go mid-shin or even to the knees just as low as we can but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm going to go five cycles and then I'm going to switch to the other side.
Five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down.
I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I want to get that
stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat, and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two, three.
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
Alright.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for my music freestyle agility, this drill is a lot of fun and it's very different from traditional training.
So what I talk about a lot in the past, you've heard me say rhythm is everything, contract relax is everything for athleticism, for agility, for change of direction.
There's probably no better way to develop this than actually going to a beat, getting loose, freestyling to your favorite song.
So what we're going to do is, if you're a basketball player, I like to just pretend like I have a basketball.
We're going to try to go to the beat.
Now, you create your own rules.
You've got your own rhythm.
You figure it out yourself.
But I want you to pick a song that's like three or four minutes long, and we're going to freestyle to that whole thing.
You can have slow sections where we relax and go smooth.
You can have fast sections.
You can challenge your foot patterns in ways that you might not even challenge it in a game, but we're just building that general ability to get our feet to listen to our brain in any scenario.
So I'm going to give you a quick example.
I hope you can hear the music a little bit.
I like to use instrumentals, so I'm just going to use an instrumental.
I'm going three straight minutes, and I'm just going to get loose, get creative.
You guys get the point.
Get creative.
Do whatever you want.
That's what athleticism is all about.
Contract, relax, rhythm, fluidity, intuition.
This drill builds it all.
Let's get it.
So for my lateral med ball toss, I'm basically going to push out laterally, and I'm going to change directions as fast as I can, push through the med ball, kind of like a shot put.
Boom, you got your guide hand and your follow through hand, so almost like a basketball shot, except it's going to be horizontal, it's going to be with a lot more power, and this is really driven from that lower body.
So it's going to be here.
Boom.
Transition.
Push as hard as I can.
Notice I didn't stay here and just turn the upper body.
I pushed off and I fully turned my body.
I'm getting that good rotational power and that good lateral power.
A lot of times when we're playing defense and defender goes by us, it's a rotational push.
It's not always lateral.
It's not always linear.
It's rotational.
So we're working on that same thing here.
Now
remember i want you to transition out quick so it's got to be here and then immediately push out so it's bone drive out toss as hard as you can pick it up and reset so if you do not have the med ball then let's just do regular lateral bounds so it's here
push high as we can, as far as we can with short ground contact time.
That's still going to get us the same qualities as far as that lateral power.
We're just missing out on the rotational power, but that's okay.
I know a lot of you guys don't have that med ball.
So if that's the case, that's a good alternative.
Let's get it.
All right, so now on this combo exercise, if you have the wall and you have a court or somewhere to sprint off, then we're going to do the full drill.
If not, it's okay.
We're just going to do half of the drill.
So if you have the wall and the space, make sure the wall is concrete.
It's not going to break.
So it's going to be starting in a split stance.
It's going to be drive.
So I'm pushing off both feet.
I'm really going to drive through this front foot like it's first step explosiveness, push the ball into the wall as hard as I can.
And then I'm going to decelerate, push laterally, open up and take off.
So it's going to be here.
Boom, boom, push out.
So sprint out as far as you can, so if you have half court, sprint it through half court.
A lot of you guys don't have that distance, so it's boom, boom, maybe sprint it out a couple steps.
What matters most is that change of direction.
So we want boom, sharp change of direction, toe is still pointed forward, sharp change of direction, rotationally, and get out of there, all right?
I want sharp cuts.
If you want to set out a cone, you can, so that you have that accountability to get out over the cone and then open up and push out.
Now if you don't have the med ball, pretend like you do.
So it's going to be here, pretend like you got that med ball, boom, boom, open up and push out, sprint as far as you can.
So for my high box death jumps, I'm going to set up with a box probably a little higher than what I'm used to.
So I'm going to start with a 30-inch box.
Now, this is a very, very intense exercise.
It is a potent stimulus, so incredible for a vertical jump, but also higher risk for our knees if you're not quite ready to absorb all this force.
How you actually choose a box is you would monitor.
So I know a lot of you guys don't have a just jump mat or something to calculate your vertical, but you can eyeball it or set up a phone.
Basically, what is your vertical jumping and landing?
Let's say it's 28 inches, right?
If I drop off a six inch box, it should still be around 28 inches or maybe actually a little bit higher.
For most of you guys, it'll be around 28 inches.
all right then we go up to say 12 inch box same thing and then we go up and we go up and we go you're gonna find a point where your vertical starts to go down the higher the drop gets and that shows you that you're not actually absorbing all of that force
So at that point where you drop from 28 to 27, we know that we went a little bit too high, right?
But for me, I can get around the same vertical at a 30 inch box because I can absorb that much force.
So that's where I'm going to train here.
So what I'm going to do is just dangle one foot off and I'm just dropping down.
I'm going to get a normal range of motion.
I'm not trying to stay as stiff as possible on these jumps.
So I'm dropping.
Boom, get up as high as I possibly can, all right?
Stick that landing.
Now, I don't want you to make this into a stiff leg depth jump where we're going for pier speed off the ground.
I want you to land and load up like we normally would in a vertical jump.
The goal is max jump height.
Sure, we do want to be quick off the ground, but the number one priority is max jump height.
So you do not have to switch feet.
You can drop off with the same foot every time.
What matters is that you're landing with both feet at the same time.
We are not landing one, two.
Now, if you're dropping off a box where you feel joint pain, you feel knee pain or back pain, ankle pain, then you're jumping off a box that is way too high.
So you want to go lower.
This should be a pain-free exercise where we're still getting a big vertical, but we are challenging how much force we're absorbing by going off a box that's a little higher than we're used to.
So for our rear foot elevated split squat, if you have a Smith machine, I advise that we use that.
It's one of the best things that we can do for the RFESS simply because we have enough stability to where we can really get max intent.
We can load up the weight and get explosive without worrying about the balance factor.
So it's one of the best ways to build pure strength and power in the rear foot elevated.
If you don't have a Smith machine, I would rather not go barbell.
I would rather just go to dumbbells.
So we're going to do the same thing, just with dumbbells as heavy as you can.
So for this rear foot elevated,
We are going to go balanced glute and quad.
So sometimes we go ankle underneath the knee.
That's going to be more glute.
Right now at that bottom position, when I got my rear foot up and I'm down on my knee, I want my knee directly over the toe.
So not beyond the toe.
I just want it right over that toe.
So that's the position that we're going to work with.
Of course we would always start with just the bar and then we would gradually load up heavier and heavier if we're feeling good.
So unrack it and then it's control down, tap that knee, explode up as hard as I can.
Now if I'm loaded heavy, of course I'm not going to be able to get up very fast.
It should be taking between half a second and a second to get from the bottom all the way to the top, but we have the intent to move that bar with a fast speed.
Okay, so we have two options for unracking that bar.
So the first option is what I just described where we get that position from there and then we go up and we unrack.
The other option is just to mark out maybe with a piece of tape or a weight where our toe will be and then I can lift up with two and then I can get that toe right where that piece of tape is and then I can go back from there.
With the Smith machine, we have the luxury of doing that since we have some stability, we don't have to worry about the balance as much.
So I can go here, and then I can work from there.
Now, if you have the dumbbells, you don't have that luxury, so I would rather see you start from the bottom up.
I would rather see the dumbbells be on the floor, and then we set up in our position, grab the dumbbells, and then we go from there.
All right, let's get after it.
Now for our freestyle dunks, I put this in there because it's so important that you get out there and just allow your body to explore different approaches, different type of dunks, different type of jumping styles without me always trying to put you in a box and trying to get you to do one thing.
So I want you to set the clock for 10 minutes and I just want you to go get as many dunks as you can.
Take breaks in between if you need to.
I do want you to be recovered in between reps.
This isn't an endurance workout.
So get up off one foot.
Throw it down.
Walk back.
Recover for 30 seconds to a minute.
Come back in.
Take off off two.
Try to dunk left.
Whatever you want to do, get creative and do it.
Of course, if you can't dunk and all you can do is touch the bottom of the net, I don't care.
I still want you to get creative.
Come in off two and touch the net.
Come from baseline, get up off one and touch the net.
Try to jump off left, touch with the left.
Variability, variety is the key to longevity and it's super important for building kind of well-rounded explosiveness and athleticism.
And so I want you to get creative, set the clock for 10 minutes, and just freestyle dunk.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in.
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they were in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state, and then I can really start to aid my recovery, and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down
to the elbows, and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side, same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now, a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band.
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day three and day six of phase 10.
Very short workout already.
Elevated stir the pot, gotta do it.
Band straight leg raise, gotta do it.
Stability hip.
Well, if your hamstrings are extremely flexible and you're getting more than 90 or 100 degrees on your active straight leg raise, make sure you look at the videos tab for that video.
If you're getting that, then you can skip this.
Otherwise, I think you should get it.
Stability ball hip twist, that's a new one you guys are going to like.
Standing hip cars, definitely do that.
Side plank row, gotta do that.
Ankle toe crawls, gotta do that, unless you have crazy ankle mobility, ankle dorsiflexion mobility.
If you have crazy mobility, you can skip that one, but most of us will definitely do that.
Now, if you wanna add in some stuff, again, with these core and mobility days, if you don't have enough mobility,
Add in some mobility drills from the previous phases, that's completely okay.
You can even add in some core exercises.
If you don't feel like your core is too tired, keep in mind we don't wanna go crazy because even training our core is demanding on the nervous system.
And since we have four days a week of lower body, plus you're mixing in your upper body, our nervous system is gonna be fighting an uphill battle.
So you don't wanna go crazy on your core.
But you can add in another exercise or maybe two exercises if you really feel like you need it.
Let's do it.
So for our elevated stir the pot rockers, what we're going to do is to stir the pot.
We're going elevated to make this a little bit more difficult.
So you can either do this on a box or up on a bench.
Essentially, we want to be flat at the top.
So if that bench is too high, you're going to be angled down.
If the bench is too low, you're going to be angled up.
So we want to be pretty much flat.
I'm going to curl my toes on that bench.
I'm going elbows directly underneath the shoulders.
and stabilize in this position.
Once we're good, it's going to be circles, big controlled circles.
All right, I'm going to go look at the rep range.
Let's say I have eight.
It's going to be eight that way, eight circles the other way, and then it's going to be eight front back.
All right.
The tendency here is for people to start to sag the hips and you'll start feeling it more in the erectors and those back muscles.
We do not want to feel this in our back.
We want to feel it front core.
We want to feel it obliques.
All right, got to keep the hips up flat the entire set.
The other common mistake is people get sloppy and out of control on the circles.
I need you to stay tight and get your full controlled circles.
Now, if you're super sweaty, make sure that you use a towel over the ball or a shirt over the ball so that you get a good grip with your forearms.
You don't want to be slipping off the ball because I've seen that happen a lot.
Now, for some of you guys, that's going to be too advanced and you're not going to be stable enough and it's going to be extremely sloppy.
If that's the case,
then take away the bend and go back to your regular stir the pot all right we got to master this one before we get to that one so make sure you're training according to your level let's do it
Alright, so for my band straight leg raise, I'm going to try to keep my knee pretty straight.
I could have a slight bend if we need to.
I'm going to keep my foot dorsiflexed, so that means my toe back towards the head, the band is around the ball of the foot, and then I'm just going rapid with it.
So let's go to a comfortable range.
and then we can gradually start to raise it higher and higher.
Make sure this opposite leg doesn't lift up, but this is not slow static stretching.
This is very dynamic.
We're working on that elasticity back in the hamstrings and in the glutes.
So I'm just gonna build up.
that speed and get it nice and rapid there all right we should feel a stretch it shouldn't be complete discomfort so maybe like a 7 out of 10 or an 8 out of 10 we're getting a slight stretch if we push it to a 10 out of 10 you're probably going to get a strained muscle so push slightly out of your comfort zone but it shouldn't hurt so bad that it's unbearable let's do it
Alright, for our stability ball hip twists, what I'm going to do is come on a bench, or you could go on a box, but I like to use a bench.
I'm going to make sure that my hips are fully supported on the bench, and then I'm going to go with the stability ball right in between my feet.
Now I'm just going to lay back.
I want to make sure that my back is flat, so I'm not in that big arch.
So think about posteriorly tilting your pelvis, tuck your tail so we're flat to the bench.
I'm going to hold on right here for a little extra support, lay my head back, and all I'm going to do is just turn right over left and then left over right.
All right, so it's just a hip swivel essentially.
I'm firing up my core.
and I'm also gonna train those hip flexors in that position.
So if you have the hip range of motion to actually get your right foot completely over the left, do it, and then the left foot completely over the right, most of you that will feel unnatural.
So you'll just go right here,
to right here.
But work with whatever range of motion that you have.
Now, if you don't have a stability ball, that's okay.
We're going to do the same exact motion without the stability ball.
So you're just here, feet up, and you're making that same range of motion.
Now, because you're taking away the weight of the stability ball, it'll be a little bit easier.
So you'll want to increase the reps a little bit.
Essentially, we want to get like a 9 out of 10 or a 10 out of 10 burn in the core.
So we're pretty much going towards failure.
You're going to push to the point either way, with or without the stability ball, push to the point where you get a 9 or a 10 out of 10 burn in the front abs.
But if we feel it more in the lower back, then you went a little bit too far.
So we want no pain in the back.
We want all that burn in the abs and maybe even a little bit down into the hip flexor.
Let's do it.
So for our standing hip CARs, CAR stands for Controlled Articular Rotation.
So this is a FRC concept, Functional Range Conditioning.
So this is getting us nice and mobile, but building stability at these short and long muscle lengths, which prevents injuries, helps us get more explosive.
So it's a little bit different in your normal type of stretching.
Rule number one, we've got to create tension through the body, tension through the upper body.
So I need you to squeeze the fist and keep a tight core in this whole drill.
From here, I'm just going to lift up as high as I can with that right knee.
And then from there, instead of a normal hip circle where we're down like that, I'm going to turn the foot outwards.
So I'm going to turn the foot out, and then I'm going to kick it around
and bring it down and then i'm going to reverse that so now i'm going to kick back as far as i can and then i'm bringing it all the way back around so i like to pretend like there's a really high fence right here and i gotta step over that imaginary fence
and then bring it down.
Some of you, balance is going to be an issue here.
It's OK if you want to hold on to something, hold on to two poles or hold on to a power rack, whatever you've got to do.
All that matters here is that we're getting the full range of motion through that hip joint.
So I don't want to leave any range of motion left in the tank.
I want you to really get every single range of motion so that we can build that stability at those ranges and really free up your hips for more movement.
for my side plank row i'm going to use a cable if you don't have a cable we can always use a band here i'm going to make sure that that cable is on the lower setting so that we're nice and flat with this cable and it's not aiming up and it's not aiming down so i'm going to get into my side plank position on that forearm i'm going to make sure that i'm grounded from the wrist all the way through the elbow and i'm just going to stack the feet nice and flat
I'm going to be nice and flat from toes all the way up to my head.
I'm not sinking, I'm not hiking the hips up.
And then from here, it's just a regular row.
So I'm going to feel that a lot in the obliques, especially the one on the underside.
So if I'm on my right side, that right oblique side of the core is going to be fired up.
If that is too difficult, we can always stack the feet so you could always
come to more of a 90 degree position and stack the legs that way.
Alright, so that's just a little bit of a easier version.
but i think most of you by this time can go ahead and get into that full stack position so we're flat all the way from the feet through the back of the head get up nice and high but i do think that most of you guys are probably ready to go to that flat position with the straight legs so try that out start with a lightweight as always and gradually go up we do want to go as heavy as we can as long as we're maintaining that posture
If we're going so heavy that we're starting to go into rotation to pull, that's too heavy.
This is more of an anti-rotation, anti-lateral flexion exercise, so I want you to stay stable while your arm moves.
So for my ankle toe crawls, what I'm going to do is get in a half kneeling position.
I'm going to work on my ankle dorsiflexion by driving my knee as far as I can over the toe.
And then I'm going to flow straight into my toe stretch.
So I got to get this knee down to the floor while keeping my big toe and my other four toes down on the ground.
So I'm here.
Now look at that position that I'm in with the toe.
So I'm challenging my toe mobility.
So what I'm going to do is just crawl in this position and I can do anywhere from four to eight reps each leg.
So I'm going to start at four.
So I'm here.
nice and slow, look how I crawl the hand forward, and then I ground that next foot, drive the knee over the toe, and gradually transition, alright?
So I'm literally just crawling, and I'm challenging my ankle mobility,
and my toe mobility as I go.
So this is essential when it comes to getting shin angles.
So you guys hear me talk a lot about the most explosive athletes have good shin angles.
If you can get horizontal shin angles, we produce more horizontal force, which means we get somewhere faster, right?
So horizontal force production is essential, but
If you get here and you lock up, right, because you don't have the ankle mobility or you have the ankle mobility but you don't have the toe mobility, we can't get that shin angle.
So now we have vertical shins.
I don't care how much force you produce with vertical shins, you can't get horizontal.
So half the battle is how much force we produce.
The other half of the battle is the angle that we're producing the force.
And so that's why we're training
This ankle mobility, you see how I got to be able to get my knee far out over my toe, which takes dorsiflexion range of motion.
But as I extend this hip, I need to have that toe range of motion.
If that toe locks up, then I don't get full extension of the hip.
So we need that dorsiflexion and we need that toe range of motion so that we can get these good shin angles and get full triple extension on our first step explosiveness.
So we're gonna do anywhere from four to eight reps, and we can do anywhere from two to four sets.
Do this a couple days a week, up to three days a week.
This is a good one that you can just add to your warmups.
You could add this to your dynamic warmups, or if you're at home and you're bored watching TV, it's a great exercise to do just to challenge that ankle mobility and that toe mobility.
Let's get it.
What's up guys, quick minimum dose advice for day one and day four of phase 11.
So this is our high intensity day.
So for our high intensity day,
We're already pretty efficient.
If we want to take anything out, let's just cut back on sets.
So, for example, instead of four sets, you could just cut back and do two sets, but still try to get through all the exercises.
If you do need to cut out any exercises, it would be the band accelerations and then, of course, the foam roller circuit.
That is optional.
and the static stretch that is completely optional everything else we absolutely have to do the high box depth jumps obviously if you have any type of joint pain this is one that we're going to skip if you're in season this would be one that we're going to skip because the eccentric component is too intense but if you're off season and your body's feeling good then definitely get that one in
So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you can go vertical.
So if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now always if we want more pressure we can cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one, we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
And then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one and if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee then start here and finish and then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one is going to be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I want to stay on the ball of the foot, and I'm just going to go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack, except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs, so I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time, back to neutral.
over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here, maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed.
So we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna go over with the left leg.
I'm gonna come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't wanna go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm gonna get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back.
So it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch.
So I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can.
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm gonna go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just gonna rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm gonna go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground, that's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles, and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral, and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor,
keep this knee straight because i want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor i'm going back with the hip like i would in a normal squat and i'm getting nice and low touch the floor and i'm popping out to that other side all right so let's just hold about one second at the bottom
and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor same thing with the skip and now i land i turn this foot forward i pivot i'm here knee a couple inches off the floor i'm gonna rotate hold one and then come back and it's to the other side
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
It's going to be a hamstring stretch.
One, two, three.
Keep the hands down and come into a deep squat.
Try to stay back on your heels if you can.
One, two, three.
Rock forward.
So I'm on my toes now.
Drive the knees out with the elbows.
Hold.
One, two.
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here.
And then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers, and we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for our banded accelerations, I'm going to get a bench and I'm going to get a band.
I like to hook two bands together, but all you really need is one band.
We want a pretty low angle on that, so hook it around something nice and stable, bottom of a power rack, or have a friend hold, but make sure that he's maybe sitting down so that you get that low angle.
Now, I want to walk it out to get some good band tension.
I should feel like it's pulling me back.
Then I'm leaning forward on the bench.
Of course, make sure this bench is nice and stable.
You could use a box or anything just to rest your hands on.
So I'm here.
Now I'm going in a split stance.
So notice how I'm in a pretty good position for maximal acceleration right now.
Now from here, I'm just going to drive as hard as I can off this right leg and I'm pushing that left knee high.
So I'm driving the knee high.
towards the chest if you're too close you're going to notice that your knee hits the bench we want to be far enough away to where we end up right here and I'm pulling that toe up towards my head and then I release and I want to build up a little bit of an eccentric so we actually get pretty rapid with it so it's a pause at the top and then I'm back down and I boom explode quick it's all about that fast transition all right so it's here
drive hold we're squeezing this glue pull that toe up towards the head release go release go we're getting explosive with it now i want to make sure that at the top of that rep i'm flat all the way through back of my head you could draw a straight line down to my heel a lot of you guys when you get low in this uh this 45 degree angle
you have tucked hip so you're here if we have tucked hip and we have hip flexion we're not getting a hundred percent out of our glutes most powerful muscle in the body most important muscle for acceleration first step explosiveness we got to be able to get that full hip extension all right so
take a video or have a friend tell you where you're at, but we should be completely straight at the top of every rep.
Now, if you don't have the setup, you don't have the band or something to anchor to or the bench, but you do have a sled, it's a great alternative.
So get in a sled and drive at that low angle.
Work on short accelerations, so maybe 15 to 20 yards, as explosive as you can.
Load up that sled nice and heavy.
I do like this variation because we get more of that eccentric, whereas the sled we only get concentric.
But if you don't have this setup, a sled is a great option as well.
So for my lateral bound dumbbell punch level two, we're gonna take this to the next level.
So now I'm going to elevate it on a box.
Now, maybe mid-shin height.
We don't want anywhere near knee height.
That's gonna be too much.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna bound out.
I'm not going max distance.
So think about...
If that's no distance and my furthest push out is max distance, I want maybe 50% of that.
So I'm holding my light dumbbell by the side.
My palm is facing that way.
I'm going to bound out.
And now when I land with that left foot, at that same time, I'm punching across.
So notice it is upper body rotation.
I'm dropping this shoulder and then I'm ripping back and I'm getting back onto the box as I rip diagonally.
Alright, so we're here, boom, and push back, stabilize at the top.
Push, get back.
push, get back, all right?
The harder I punch with the dumbbell, the more force I have to absorb with this left leg and redirect with this left leg.
Now, I don't want this to be something where you're going through the motions and you're just punching with the dumbbell.
It has to be an upper body rotation.
So, one thing that this really translates well to is a single leg dunk.
So if you think about a single leg dunk,
Step in, we go with that cross swing.
But when you go with that cross swing, if you watch the best one foot dunkers, it's not just with the ball, it's with the opposite shoulder.
So they're loading up that core and then it's a full body effort.
It's lower body and it's this upper body rip.
We get a lot of force from that diagonal upper body rip, right?
We're training the exact same thing here where we're absorbing and we're loading, we're coiling up, and then we uncoil when we rip back onto the box.
It is the same exact motion and it's going to really translate to that single leg jump with those specific mechanics.
Let's get it.
So for our hang clean pull, when we set up with that barbell, we're not going to be stiff leg.
Think about the position we set up for an RDL.
Slight bend in the knees, from there it's a hip hinge to get that barbell down right above the knees before we explode.
We do not want to make this into a squat pattern where we go down by bending the knees.
We have that initial bend, but from there the knees don't bend anymore.
It's just butt back back back and then explode up with it.
Basically what we're doing is a hook grip.
So I'm going around with the thumb and then I'm holding on to that with my fingers.
I'm going a little bit wider than shoulder width apart with that grip.
and I'm gonna pull up.
Now, I'm showing this with a light weight.
Of course, we're gonna go as heavy as we can with good form.
Start light and then gradually go up.
So I want high power in short ranges of motion.
So I don't wanna go past the knees.
I'm just gonna get right above the knees with that barbell and then I'm gonna explode up and I'm gonna come to full hip extension.
I'm coming all the way to the toes and then I'm shrugging it up at the top.
Now if your elbows bend a little bit, that's okay.
So if we kind of come into like a half, remember our high pull where we're here?
If we come into like half of that and that bar comes up and the elbows bend a little bit, that's okay.
But this weight should be heavy enough to where we couldn't complete a full high pull.
Now if that barbell is light enough to where you can high pull it and get it to your mid chest, that means it's too light, we gotta go up.
We're working more on that strength side of things and less on the speed side.
Now common mistakes here, common mistake number one is people come into this and then they get into hyper extension.
I don't want you to lean back.
I want you to pretend like you're being measured at the top.
So if you're six foot, I want you to be 6'5 up at the top.
We can't be 6'5 if we're leaning back like this.
So at the top, I want you to be tall with your head.
I want you to be tall with your shoulders.
Alright, now we're not going to hold that shrug position, you're going to explode with it and then we're going to land in a safe position and then reset and go again.
I don't want this to be rapid so it's not going to be constant, you're going to go and then you're going to stop, you're going to reset and then go again.
Another common mistake is getting the barbell too far out in front, so a lot of times
You go here and then the barbell comes up on this line.
The further away that barbell gets from our body, the more stress we're going to have on our lower back.
So we want to think about keeping it close to the body.
Advanced weightlifters will actually brush the thigh and pop off into that.
Now if you're not advanced and you're not
with this stuff you might not quite get that thigh brush that's okay as long as you're keeping it very close to where we're either making contact with the thigh or we're a half an inch away from the thigh I just don't want that barbell getting out in front of your body and
And the final common mistake here is timing issues.
So we want to make sure that we're finishing with the hips and we're finishing with the ankles at the same time.
I don't want you to come to full hip extension and then extend from the feet.
Think about a vertical jump, we're finishing with the ankles and that final little hip snap
at the same time all right so i don't want it to be ankles and then hip and i don't want it to be hip and then ankles it's got to be very fluid finished with the hips and the ankles at the same time now one more thing if you're experienced using straps you might as well use straps on this exercise because as you get heavier and heavier eventually your grip strength might become the limiting factor
We do not want our grip to be the limiting factor, so if you're experienced using straps, go ahead and use them.
So for the assisted jump, there's a lot of different ways to do this.
The way that I like to do it is I just like to use a power rack and I just loop a band through there.
So I loop it through, make sure that we're nice and stable there, and then I just step back a little bit.
Now, you've got to be safe with this.
I don't want you using a band that has so much tension that when you jump, you're being pulled forward because you could easily hit your head on the rack.
I want you to use a band where you can come down with your hands right about chin level, step back a little bit, and then you're able to just jump straight up and down without getting pulled in towards a rack, alright?
Some people, if you're at like a LA Fitness where they have a hoop attached to the wall,
You can always loop a band around the pole that attaches the hoop to the wall, and you can just go right underneath and explode.
There's a lot of different ways to do it.
The key to assisted jumps, it's an overspeed exercise, so I'm teaching my nervous system to activate muscle fibers faster.
But if there's no force involved because the band has too much tension and it's doing all the work to pull me up, then this isn't beneficial at all.
And so I recommend the 10 to 20% range.
So I'm increasing my vertical by 10 to 20%, okay?
So if I have a standing 30 inch vertical, and let's just say I was measuring on like a just jump mat or some sort of device like an app,
If I jump with this, I don't wanna be all of a sudden at 40 inches.
I wanna be anywhere from 33 to maybe 36 or 37 inches.
Now, I don't need you to test, but you can kind of just eyeball it and just feel like, hey, maybe I'm getting an extra five inches on this.
That means that you still have to apply force, but because you've deloaded your body weight a little bit with the band, then you're able to apply that force faster.
Now, because a major goal of this phase
eccentric and transitioning out of the bottom I do want you to think about attacking the floor so I need you to drop as fast as we can I don't want you to slowly lower or let gravity take you down I want you to think about starting high and attack the floor get up and then reset attack the floor get up reset okay and again we do not want to get pulled forward every rep on these I want to be able to step back and go straight up straight down without this band
pulling me too far in.
So for our banded quarter squats, we're going to hook up our bands.
Now, I have really thick band tension, so I hook it up to the pins because it's too tight to actually hook it up to the bottom.
YouTube, if you don't know how to set up the bands the right way for accommodating resistance, search on YouTube.
There's hundreds of videos on different setups.
If you have thinner bands, of course, you can hook it around, so loop it around the bottom, hook it to the inside, put the weights on the outside.
So mess around with it a little bit if your bands are too light.
Sometimes you can double loop it and get a little bit more band tension.
So what we're going for is a quarter squat position.
So start off obviously light.
This is an exercise that we're going to load up heavy, but I want most of the load to be through that band tension at the top.
So we're essentially going to get down to about 90 degree knee angle.
Now that's not a half squat.
Our normal half squat would be about parallel to the floor.
I just want you right here at 90 degrees so it's more of a quarter squat position and then we explode up as hard as we can to the toes.
Now, if we explode up and we feel like we can leave the ground, the weight is too light or the band tension is too light.
Alright?
That band tension is going to be light at the bottom and then it's going to be heavy at the top.
So it's accommodating resistance.
We're getting more resistance as we go up and that's what it's all about for the vertical jump.
Now, if you don't have bands or you don't have a good power rack setup where we can loop it to the rack and be safe, we could go chains.
If we have chains that build up on the floor at that bottom position and then at the top, they're off the floor, then that's still accommodating resistance.
We still have more resistance at the top.
and if we don't have bands or chains it's okay let's just use weights let's load up nice and heavy and let's just rep out that that same uh quarter squat range of motion now it's not going to be as beneficial because we don't have more resistance at the top but hey let's work with what we got so of course if we're going to be doing banded squats i'm assuming that you've already mastered your normal back squats if not
go back and let's just work on form, working on your back squats.
But assuming that you're advanced, we're gonna step into that barbell and I gotta make sure that when I unrack, these bands aren't set up too far back.
Because if they are too far back, I'm gonna unrack and it's gonna pull me backwards, right?
I also don't want it too far forward because then I unrack and it pulls me forward.
So notice that they're about even with my feet or a little bit behind my feet when I step in that barbell.
So notice they're right behind my heels and then I can lift up and it doesn't pull me back too much.
I can just walk back so that my ankle and my midfoot is aligned with that line of pull with the band.
Now from there I'm just dropping down.
I'm not going to control down slow but I'm also not going to let it pull me down too rapid because then it's a little too dangerous.
So we're just gonna go down at a normal speed and then at that bottom position, notice the band is light there and then I explode up and at the top it gets heavier.
I'm coming all the way up to my toes and then I'm gonna reset.
So it's here, explode, reset.
Drop, explode, reset.
Now obviously this weight is a little bit too light for me.
I would be loading up much heavier, but keep in mind we do still want to get up fast.
If you're getting towards your last couple reps of the set and you're really slow and you're grinding it out, then that's more on the strength side.
We want to be in that strength speed
where it is heavy, but we're still accelerating it very fast.
So if you feel like you're having huge velocity drop-offs, go down and wait so that we can maintain that peak velocity throughout the whole set.
If you were tracking, we would basically be going until we drop off like more than 10 or 15% and then we would stop the set, alright?
So if you feel like you get good velocity and then your next couple reps you're kind of getting stuck in quicksand, well then it's probably a little bit too heavy.
Let's go down.
Let's maintain that good explosive power.
Let's get it.
So for my high box death jumps, I'm going to set up with a box probably a little higher than what I'm used to.
So I'm going to start with a 30-inch box.
Now, this is a very, very intense exercise.
It is a potent stimulus, so incredible for a vertical jump, but also higher risk for our knees if you're not quite ready to absorb all this force.
So how you actually choose a box is you would monitor.
So I know a lot of you guys don't have a just jump mat or something to calculate your vertical, but you can eyeball it or set up a phone.
Basically, what is your vertical jumping and landing?
Let's say it's 28 inches, right?
If I drop off a six-inch box, it should still be around 28 inches or maybe actually a little bit higher.
For most of you guys, it'll be around 28 inches, all right?
Then we go up to, say, a 12-inch box, same thing.
And then we go up and we go up and we go up.
you're going to find a point where your vertical starts to go down the higher the drop gets.
And that shows you that you're not actually absorbing all of that force.
So at that point where you drop from 28 to 27, we know that we went a little bit too high, right?
But for me, I can get around the same vertical at a 30 inch box because I can absorb that much force.
So that's where I'm going to train here.
So what I'm going to do is just dangle one foot off and I'm just dropping down.
I'm going to get a normal range of motion.
I'm not trying to stay as stiff as possible on these jumps.
So I'm dropping, boom, get up as high as I possibly can, all right?
Stick that landing.
Now, I don't want you to make this into a stiff leg depth jump where we're going for pier speed off the ground.
I want you to land and load up like we normally would in a vertical jump.
The goal is max jump height.
Sure, we do want to be quick off the ground, but the number one priority is max jump height.
So you do not have to switch feet.
You can drop off with the same foot every time.
What matters is that you're landing with both feet at the same time.
We are not landing one, two.
Now, if you're dropping off a box where you feel joint pain, you feel knee pain or back pain, ankle pain, then you're jumping off a box that is way too high.
So you want to go lower.
This should be a pain-free exercise where we're still getting a big vertical, but we are challenging how much force we're absorbing by going off a box that's a little higher than we're used to.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
okay so i'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill all right so it's in through the nose and i want to make sure that my stomach is rising okay your chest will naturally rise a little bit but most of you when you think of deep breathing what happens is your belly stays still
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they were in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we want to do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just going to go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm going to sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm going to sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're going to come down to the elbows and we're just going to hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm going to pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull
this knee as far towards the chest as i can now a lot of you as you pull the tendency is to rise here because we're tightening the hip flexors if that's the case try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here but this is a glute stretch for this left leg but at the same time for a lot of you this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just gonna go on one knee.
This knee is gonna go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just gotta get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already gonna feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just gonna lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm gonna hold.
All right, so I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically gonna do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm gonna push back like this.
I'm gonna straighten out my arms.
and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day two and day five of phase 11.
So this is a very easy day.
The intense day, the day one and day four are pretty high intensity on the nervous system.
So on this day, we couldn't handle any more nervous system intense work.
And so you'll notice that it's very submaximal stuff.
We got our submaximal bounds.
This is good for the tendons, but you should not be overexerting yourself.
Now, the hamstring walkouts, we'll get a good pump in the hamstrings, we'll get some strength, but it's not an extremely intense exercise.
The side plank hip abduction, we're getting some good hip work.
It's good for injury prevention.
And then the four-way ankle walks, this is very good for the front of the shin, the anterior tibialis, our calves, the lateral aspects of our shin and our ankle muscles.
So this is a good overall injury reduction day.
It's also good because we're going to get a little bit of a pump with these isolation exercises, which goes a long way for our overall recovery.
Let's get it.
We're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
so you can either go this way or you could go vertical so if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute now always if we want more pressure we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher
Or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings.
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're going to go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just going to go into a quad stretch, so I'm going to pull my right foot up.
I want to make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm going to keep the left knee straight, and I'm just going to go into a lean as low as I can.
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold one, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction, and I'm gonna activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just gonna hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze, and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up, it's the most powerful muscle in the body, so we gotta get them revved up for our session.
So for my side plank hip abduction, I'm gonna go ahead and stack my legs, 90 degree angle there with the knees, and then I'm gonna come down on that forearm.
So I don't want you on the elbow, I don't want you on the wrist, I want your full forearm down on the ground.
I'm going to make sure that I'm nice and flat through the body so I don't want to have a major tucked hip there.
I want to be extended nice and flat.
Now from there, I'm just lifting my hips off the ground and then I'm going to drive this leg at the same time.
So I'm up.
I'm driving that leg at the top and then I'm right back down.
Bring your hip all the way back down to the ground.
Torso is still off the floor but that hip will touch down.
So it's here, hip touches down, your full thigh is on the ground and drive up off that.
So you're gonna feel a lot of this on that leg that's down.
You're gonna feel that through the lateral portion of the hip.
So we're working that hip abduction, but then you're also gonna feel it through that oblique that's down as well.
So if my right side is down, as I'm pushing up, I'm gonna feel it from here all the way up through that lateral aspect of the core.
So if you did wanna make this a little bit more difficult,
Stay in that same position and you could add a band, a mini band right above the knees.
Not necessarily essential.
Even our NBA players have a tough time with this because if you're getting the perfect form and you're getting the hips to light up in the areas that we want, we're training a lot of those smaller stabilizing muscles.
And so this is actually pretty tough.
But if this does feel way too easy and you don't feel any of a burn in that lateral aspect of the hip, then you can add the band.
or if you're super advanced you could start to go with just full straight legs and then you're coming down and driving like that come down touch and drive all right but that's a pretty difficult variation most of you are going to be better off with that 90 degrees stacked legs here's the four-way ankle with a resistive band
For ankle eversion, take a roll or a rolled up towel and place it underneath your leg.
Then take the band and place it around the ball of your foot with the knot on the inside.
Then wrap it around the other foot and turn away.
Try to use just movement at your ankle and not your whole leg.
For ankle inversion, take the resistive band and wrap it around the ball of your foot with the knot on the outside.
Then cross it over your other leg and wrap the band around your foot, turning outwards.
For ankle plantar flexion with the resistive band, take a roll or a rolled up towel and place it underneath your legs so you'll have movement in your foot.
Then take the band and put it just at the ball of your foot.
Give yourself some resistance, and then push down as far as you comfortably can, and come back up.
Nice and controlled.
For ankle dorsiflexion with a resistive band, take a roll or a rolled up towel and place it underneath your legs so you have movement at your ankle.
Then take the band and wrap it around a sturdy table, putting the band around the ball of your foot, and then holding the band nice and tight, and then pulling up towards you, and controlling it coming back down.
What's up, guys?
Quick minimum dose advice for day three and day six of phase 11.
Very simple core workout, nice and efficient.
Obviously, if you have perfect mobility already, skip the mobility exercises.
We don't necessarily have to continue to build more.
Do all of the core exercises.
It's already very short and efficient, only three exercises.
If you want to add in some extra stuff, if you have the time and the energy, go ahead and add some extra core work.
And then as always, you could add a third core day if you want to.
So on that off day, which would be Sunday, you can absolutely add in a third core day.
Let's get it.
So for our barbell rollout, we're going to get a normal barbell and put a couple plates on each side.
Now you could go with the smaller 10 pound plates or if you have bumper plates that probably works even better.
Now if you don't have the barbell, you could go with a normal ab roller.
And if you don't have either, then you're just going to do hand walkouts.
So I'll show you that at the end.
So if you have the barbell, I like to go pretty wide grip.
I get my pinky here on the seams.
And then from there, I'm going to go all the way out and I'm trying to get full extension at the bottom.
So all the way out.
Full extension and then roll it back up.
I want to feel this exercise in the front core.
So I want to feel this in my abs and not in my lower back.
A lot of people don't have the core strength to do this exercise and they feel it more in their lower back.
So I want to make sure that at the bottom you are not hyper extending.
if anything i want you to go out halfway and keep that integrity in the spine so we keep that neutral spine and we're not hyper extended all right so the progression would be out
to here and back up, right?
And then if you get better, then we can go out a little further and back up.
And if that spine remains neutral and you feel it in the front core, we can keep going lower and lower until we get to the point where we're all the way fully extended.
Now, keep in mind, this is an exercise where you will feel a burn during the set, but the next day, the soreness is pretty high compared to most ab exercises.
This one produces a fair amount of soreness because there is a long, slow eccentric.
So be cautious, don't go overboard on this and don't add too many sets on this beyond what's recommended because remember, you probably will feel that soreness tomorrow.
All right, now if you don't have the barbell and you don't have an ab roller, you can just do hand walkouts.
So I'm just gonna go down here, neutral position, and I'm just gonna walk out my hands as far as I can.
and then creep them back up.
Notice I'm only going a couple inches at a time and I want to get as far out as I can and then inch it back up.
If you don't have the ankle mobility to keep your heels down and sit in that bottom position, then I want you to grab the weight
and I want you to come into a deep squat without the heels on the ground.
So I would just come forward, my knees are over the toes, and now from here, elbows are resting on the knees, and I'm just trying to sit the heels down as low as I can.
If you can get the heels down, great.
Then we're going to just rock side to side, trying to drive that knee right over the middle of my foot.
and we're just gonna rock there now if you can't get your heels down just get as far as you can all right so i'm pushing my heels as close as i can but they are off the ground now from here i'm just gonna rock side to side all right and we're still gonna get ankle mobility even though the heels aren't on the ground and week after week we can start to get the heels closer and closer until we're able to really sit with a flat foot and rock side to side and get that good ankle mobility
So for our split stance anti-rotation ABCs, what I'm gonna do is capital letters A through J. Now I want you in a split stance.
So think about if you were gonna drop your feet, that is the position, that's our base position that we're working with here because
When we drop to that position and get into our drive, we always take hand checks, we always take hits to one side of our body and a lot of us fly into rotation.
We have to have that anti-rotation core strength so that we can push through those situations.
But too often we get good anti-rotation in that square stance and we never get it in that actual split stance.
What I'm gonna do is get to that position, nice and low, I gotta brace my core here, nice and strong, my breath is normal, and then I'm gonna press right out in front of my chest, and I'm gonna start that ABC, so capital letter A, capital B,
capital C, A through J, and then I switch it and I do it the other way.
Make sure that the inside foot, so the foot that's closer to the cable machine, is back.
And then when we switch, that left foot is back.
Now, if you don't have the cable machine, of course you can just use a band hooked up to a power rack or something nice and stable.
We're going to get very similar effects there, but if you can, we would want to use the cable and of course start light and gradually go up.
We do want to get as heavy as we can here.
The heavier we get, the more we're going to get stable in that split stance position, fire up that core, get nice and strong and stable so that we can be dominant once we hit the court or the field.
So for our hip flexor box, what I'm going to do, easiest version, is sit up nice and tall, plant your hands into the ground, get up, and then it's just going to be raise, bring it out, and bring it down.
We're trying to make a big box, full range of motion.
We're loading that hip flexor, so we're building some strength at those vulnerable angles that our hip flexor doesn't like to move at.
boom, over and down, up, over and down.
Now once you've got that down, let's squeeze the hands, let's sit up nice and tall because now we actually build a little bit more stability through the core and now we can really start to train
those hips.
So same thing, we're pushing that range of motion.
Remember that hip flexor is operating in a really shortened position and so it's going to feel like you're almost going to cramp.
That's kind of the feeling that we want to have here, that's completely normal.
Now if you are cramping, you might be pushing it a little too far, but you want to feel like you're almost going to cramp.
Alright, now common mistake is we're here and then to get the leg up, we lean back like this.
Remember, we're trying to challenge just that hip structure right now and we're trying to build that stability and that motor control so that our brain starts to trust it because if you have tight hip flexors, chances are good you actually have weak hip flexors and the brain is tightening it up because it feels like it's in danger.
So we might actually need less stretching and more strengthening.
This is an exercise where you might feel the burn but this is actually going in a positive direction towards better hip mobility.
For my stability ball roll up, I can either use a stability ball or I could just use a basketball.
I need this foot, my right foot off the ground about six inches, this leg straight up in the air and point the toe.
If I can have it at 90 degrees, great.
Most of you won't, it'll be a little bit lower.
And you're just going to pin opposite.
So left leg high, right hand.
And now I'm just going to gradually move it up about six inches with each hand until it reaches the toe.
And then I bring it back down until I'm all the way back down to the ground with my head.
All right, so it's here all the way up to the toe and right back down.
Alright, once I finish the desired reps with that left leg, right hand, I switch and I go right leg, left hand.
Alright, we're going to feel a big burn in that front core, anterior abdominal muscles get fired up.
This is a good one to actually get your front core nice and ripped if your body fat is low enough, your abs are going to start to pop out a little bit with this exercise.
So for our 90-90 loaded mobility, I'm gonna go 90-90 shin box.
So I'm 90 degrees here, I'm 90 degrees here, and I'm 90 degrees here, all right?
I'm on my right glute, so that means I'm gonna go to my right side to start.
So I need my chest in line with this knee, so I'm not here, I'm squaring up chest to right knee, and then I'm just bringing chest down towards the knee.
Now, normally that would be a good static stretch.
I feel it in the glutes, the external rotators, all that good stuff.
But the brain wants load to make serious long-term changes.
So from here, instead of relying on my hands and just holding a static stretch, I'm going to contract that glue and contract the external rotators.
and push myself up and then slowly lower myself back down.
So I'm keeping the glute on tension.
I'm keeping the hip structure on tension the entire time.
So the better we get at it with our palms down,
the more we can start to get towards our fingertips and I'm barely pushing into the floor.
I'm really putting almost all of my weight on this leg and I'm just bouncing up and down in that position.
All right.
So you're going to feel a stretch.
in the outside of your hip but you're also going to feel like it's strengthening at the same time your nervous system is going to start trusting those positions that's a vulnerable position and so once the brain knows that it has some motor control and some strength in those weird angles it's going to start to trust it more and more long term that's pretty good for injury prevention
Now how the reps work is by time.
So if it says 20 seconds, that would mean that I get to this bottom position and then the clock starts and I'm working for 20 seconds.
As that set goes on, I'm trying to go lighter and lighter with the hands so that I'm really loading the hip.
After our 20 seconds, we would switch over and hit it to the other side.
What's up guys, minimum dose advice for phase 12, already very efficient.
Notice our Monday and our Thursday are slightly different, almost the same workout.
These are higher intensity lower body days, but they are slightly different.
For day one, we need to do the overcoming ankle isometrics.
Very, very, very important.
A lot of people get confused on the sets and reps here.
One set is a three second hold.
So I hold right leg, push as hard as you can, hold left leg, push as hard as you can.
That's one set.
Then you rest 30 seconds and then you go back in.
So it's six total sets there.
If you have to skip one, skip the drop lateral box jump.
Love this, but if you're pressed for time, that would be one that we could skip over.
got to do our split stance half squat this is our lower body meat and potatoes for the day so do not skip this if you have patellar tendonitis or knee pain this is one that you would want to skip and instead do like an rdl or a high pole or something that's more hip dominant a heavy single leg bridge got to do this this is our heavy post chain for the day band resisted line hops if you're pressed for time skip this but i do love this exercise
As always, do the 7-Eleven breathing.
Skip the static stretch if you have to.
So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
So you can either go this way or you could go vertical.
So if you go this way, we're just going to lean over to one side and then I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute.
Now, always, if we want more pressure, we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher.
Or we could go vertical here and then we can lean over and get the glute horizontally as well.
So the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain.
We're going to focus on the hamstrings.
So I'm just going to sit on the roller and I'm going to cross over this foot and I'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee.
So I'm just going to start in the center and then I'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so I can get the outside of my hamstrings and then I'm going to rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're going to do is the calves.
So we're just going to cross over and I'm going to push myself up.
So my hips are off the ground and I'm just going to roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles and our next one we're flipping over.
We're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm going to go on the side of the roller now and I'm just going to come down into a plank position and I'm going to roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's going to be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
and I'm gonna really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping, we gotta really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
and I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're gonna go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm gonna coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm gonna go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just gonna speed that up.
I'm gonna get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50% of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
OK, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this, I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can,
So I'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back.
I'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and I'm getting this hamstring a good stretch.
And I'm also working on my balance at the same time.
I'm going to go five leans and then I'm going to switch over five leans on the other side.
For the hip opener, we're going to go push up position.
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three and back up so three there three there I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side five and five same thing for the adductor hip flexor combo I'm going lateral with one skip so it's one skip lateral and I'm going down I'm trying to touch this floor keep this knee straight because I want to get that
stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor i'm going back with the hip like i would in a normal squat and i'm getting nice and low touch the floor and i'm popping out to that other side all right so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out i need five of these down and back so it's 10 total and then i immediately go into a hip flexor
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back.
And it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's gonna be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so I'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one two three
Three.
Rock it back.
Heels back down to the ground.
One, two, three.
I need one hand up.
Two hand up.
Not out here.
We need it back behind the head.
And stand.
Alright.
So that's one cycle.
We're going to go for three of these.
So it's one, two, three.
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here.
And then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm gonna get a really good isometric contraction
And I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we've got to get them revved up for our session.
So for our overcoming ankle isometrics, what we're gonna do is set up the pins.
Now, if you don't have the pins, sometimes the U-hooks can actually work.
You can go underneath there with the barbell, depends how it's set up.
For me, I like to set up the pins around chin height.
If you wanna have it a little bit higher, you could, but you can't have them too low, otherwise our angle is gonna be too low on this exercise.
So I'm setting up the barbell here, and then I'm just gonna step under,
We want no weight on the bar.
And then basically I'm just driving as hard as I can into the pins.
So I'm going to come to one foot.
I'm going to bring my heel off the ground.
I'm not maximally plantar flex like that, but I'm just on the ball of the foot and the heel is off the ground.
And then from there, I'm just driving this other leg high.
and I'm going to push as hard as I can into these pins.
Notice I have a slight bend in this right knee, but it's a very minimal knee bend.
So I'm driving through the knee and through that ankle to push as hard as I can into these pins.
Now pay attention to the rep range.
It's going to be very short because we're going for maximal force into the pins.
As soon as we start to decrease that maximal force and fatigue kicks in, we're stopping the set.
So we're going for quality, high force, short sets, full recovery, and then we go back in.
Now, if you don't have a rack that has the pins or U-hooks that you could put the barbell underneath, then what you're going to do is go up against a wall or go up against a rack or something stable and do the same thing.
So now we're just going at an angle and I'm just pushing in to the rack as hard as I possibly can.
So not as good, but we are still getting similar angles and we're still getting an overcoming isometric.
If you can't do either of those, we could always go on a leg press and go ball of the foot on, heel off, and then hold a weight that's as heavy as we can handle.
If you go on the leg press, I wouldn't pull the pins because that weight is so heavy, we wouldn't want it to come down on us.
So I'd keep the pins there and then I would just lift off just a little bit and hold that position.
So with this exercise, this is one of the best things that we can do for building that functional ankle stiffness.
So when it comes to sprint speed, when it comes to change of direction, one of the most important factors is being able to have that stiff ankle so that when we land, we don't deform and waste valuable ground contact time.
When we build strength in this exercise, it can really start to translate over to the court and to the field with stiffer, more quick cuts through the ankles.
So for our drop lateral box jump, what we're gonna do is first just stand on a box.
I want it below knee height.
If you're not extremely advanced with your single leg landings from high heights, then I just want you to go a really low box, all right?
For me or for a lot of advanced athletes who can't absorb this much force on one leg, then we go a box about knee height or just below.
So notice that I have the other box about four feet forward in front of the box that I'm dropping off and about three to four feet to the side.
It's going to be different for everybody.
You're going to have to play around with it a little bit.
Okay, so if that box is to the left of me, I'm dropping off.
I'm reactive off the ground with this left, boom, push.
Now I do want to keep my shoulders over my hips or pointed in that direction.
So I'm setting up my change of direction instead of
deforming from the core and coming here on the change of direction like a lot of us do and makes our change of direction significantly slower so i'm trying to change directions as quick as i possibly can i'm pushing out and now to double right so now it's right land right push land on two and get up so it's right right land on two and get up
Notice now when we're landing on two, I'm landing with the feet at the same time, and I gotta decelerate myself.
A lot of you guys are gonna jump, and your momentum is gonna take you over here.
We gotta work on stopping on a dime laterally and getting straight up on this box.
Now, I want you to jump on a box that challenges you, but remember, we always wanna land in this quarter squat position.
If I'm landing with my thigh below parallel, that box is too high, you need to go down with that box.
Now, I know some of you guys won't have two boxes, but as long as you have one box or a bench or something that we can drop off, we don't necessarily need this box.
I could set up a little hurdle and work on jumping over that.
Or if I'm on the court, I could just jump and touch the rim.
So I could drop off, boom, do my double lateral, and then get up and touch the rim or touch the backboard.
That's just as good.
So, of course, we got to do this to both sides.
So if it says, let's say, three reps,
That means I do my three reps to this side and then I take this box and I slide it over to the other side.
And now I have three reps to the other side.
So for our split stance half squat, what we're gonna do is step in.
I do not want an elongated split.
We're gonna go with a short, compact split stance.
This is more of a sport specific split stance squat.
So when I come in,
I'm just going to step back and I'm going to get this left toe in line with my right heel.
Then from there, I'm just coming down until this right thigh is parallel to the floor and then explode up.
You'll notice that we are getting a little bit of ankle mobility in this back leg and we do get quite a lot of knee flexion, so we're training that knee in that knee over toe position.
We're not taking it overboard because not all of our weight is on this back leg.
We want more of our weight towards this front leg.
So this front leg we're thinking of as the working leg.
We get down to parallel and then explode out of the bottom.
Now, this is a traditional strength exercise.
So we're not necessarily going for maximal speed.
I do want you to explode up fast, but the weight should be heavy enough to where you actually move pretty slow.
So from that bottom position to the top position, so bottom thigh parallel to top position, I want it to take about one full second.
So you're exploding as fast as we can, but it takes you maybe close to a second no longer.
If you're taking longer than a second, then it's too heavy.
If you're taking less than like half a second, it might be too light.
I do want to build some good traditional strength here.
So load it up as long as you have perfect form.
And as always, we're going to start light and then gradually go up once we get comfortable with the exercise.
Now keep in mind, you are going to have more of an upright torso.
So look at the bottom position.
I have a slight lean, but it's nowhere near what I would have in a deadlift or even a regular barbell back squat.
You have more of a lean.
So this, because it's more knee dominant and quad dominant, you're going to keep more of an upright torso in that bottom position.
Now, if you're somebody who is prone to knee pain, this exercise is probably not for you.
You could try to go very light and work through the range slow because it is good to put some stress on those quads and strengthen them up.
But if you have like patellar tendonitis or any other knee problems, you're going to want to skip this exercise and instead do a hip dominant exercise.
So go back to your RDLs or you could do like a split stance trap bar RDL or split stance dumbbell RDL.
But I don't want you to stress your knees too much by trying to go into this movement because it is very knee dominant.
So for our heavy single leg hip bridge, I'm going to go on a box or bench.
Make sure it's nice and stable.
If you're going on a bench, put weights behind it so it doesn't slide.
Now, I want you to start light.
You maybe start with a 10 or 25 pound plate on you.
And we're just holding in that single leg position.
Now, most of us will go about 45.
If you can load heavier, then go ahead and stack them up.
We can go another 45 on top, another 45 on top.
Nobody actually usually gets to that level.
Go as heavy as we can, as long as we can hold in that perfect single leg bridge position.
Now, if you are going to stack plates, you need friends to be able to put them on and to hold them.
So I want you to get in that position and then I want your friends to stack them on top.
If you don't have friends to stack, put them on your thighs like this.
get into position as long as you just have one it's not going to slide too much and then bring it here so that center is right over your belly button then make sure your shoulder blades are all the way on the box I can go down with my elbows here and then I'm just extending one leg and it's a hold now make sure that the ankle is about underneath the knee so I don't want it too far here and I don't want it too close to you here so ankle underneath the knee
and then it's a hold.
Now if you have friends to stack, have them stack one on top of the other, but they need to hold them in position.
And when you're ready to get out of it, they need to be the ones that take it off.
I don't want you to have to throw it off for you to get out of that exercise.
Now the other option would be to load up with a barbell.
So if you have a thick pad, you could use the pad, load up with a barbell, and hold in that position.
However you want to load that's most comfortable and safe for you, you do that.
But we do want to load up pretty heavy and get that maximal isometric contraction in the glutes.
So for our band-resisted line hops, I'm going to hook up the band to a power rack or something nice and stable.
I like to use two thin bands and tie them together.
Just make sure you don't have the super thick bands like this because that's going to be too much tension.
If you don't have the bands, then let's just do this without the resistance.
That's fine.
So I'm going to step in.
i'm going to start at the point where i just have a little bit of tension notice that it's pulling directly behind so i want to even with about hip height now from here you could either have a line or i'm just using an imaginary line and i'm going on one foot and i'm going as quick as i possibly can over and back all the way out until i can't go any further and then i'm going to bring it back so on the way back we're actually getting a little more deceleration so
it's here quick as we can over and back over and back staying on the ball of the foot now i have maximal tension and now i bring it back now it's pulling me so the tendencies to make big jumps you got to keep them small and precise so it's here
working on deceleration through the calf, through the Achilles.
So one rep is all the way down and all the way back.
And then of course we do the reps to each side.
When it comes to building raw quickness, this is one of the best drills that we can do.
Let's get it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate i mean we are not actually getting all of that air all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs so i want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in okay so we're here in deep through the nose let the stomach rise seven seconds once you finish that seven seconds it's out through the nose
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they're in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff i mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay i got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
So if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we want to do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back
and I'm just gonna hold 15 seconds, and then I'm gonna switch over to the other side.
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down to the elbows and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm going to pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not going to lift off and I'm just going to lay my head back and just pull
this knee as far towards the chest as i can now a lot of you as you pull the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors if that's the case try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here but this is a glute stretch for this left leg but at the same time for a lot of you this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side
So I'm just going to pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward.
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right, so I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically gonna do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm gonna push back like this.
I'm gonna straighten out my arms.
And now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee.
So we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius.
That's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor.
That's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
So quick minimum dose advice for day two and day five.
This is our lower intensity, lower body day.
Lower intensity doesn't mean it's easy.
It just means from a nervous system level, it's not as high intensity.
We're not going as heavy.
If we want to skip our 90-90 loaded mobility, that's fine.
If your hip mobility is really good, we don't need it.
Around the world cross drives love this exercise, but if you're pressed for time, skip that.
The most important exercises for today's workout
slanted isometric holds, and the Nordic curls.
Never skip those two.
Rapid calf raise, if you have the time to do that, great exercise.
Do the 7-Eleven breathing, skip the static stretch if you're pressed for time.
Let's get it.
So we're going to get through a foam roller circuit.
I have a long roller from Skills.
You can do long or you can do one of the shorter rollers that you can get from Skills online, or you can just get it from Walmart or Target.
So the first muscle that we're going to focus on is the glutes, one of the most important muscles for us to foam roll.
so you can either go this way or you could go vertical so if you go this way we're just going to lean over to one side and then i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way up to the top of my glute now always if we want more pressure we could cross over here and add a little more pressure to make it a little tougher
or we could go vertical here and then we could lean over and get the glute horizontally as well so the next one we're going to move down the posterior chain we're going to focus on the hamstrings so i'm just going to sit on the roller and i'm going to cross over this foot and i'm just going to roll from the bottom of my glute all the way to the top of my knee so i'm just going to start in the center and then i'm gradually going to rock over a little bit so i can get the outside of my hamstrings
and then I'm gonna rock to the inside so I can get the inside of my hamstrings.
Now the next one we're gonna do is the calves.
So we're just gonna cross over and I'm gonna push myself up so my hips are off the ground and I'm just gonna roll basically from the bottom of the knee all the way up to the top of the ankle.
So we're going over that calf and also over that Achilles.
And our next one we're flipping over, we're going hip flexor all the way down to the quad.
So I'm gonna go on the side of the roller now and I'm just gonna come down into a plank position and I'm gonna roll
from that hip flexor all the way down towards the top of my thigh.
So I'm getting my whole quad in this one.
And if you can't get down to the quad muscles around your knee, then start here and finish.
And then you would scoot up and then just focus on those lower quad muscles down around the knee.
Our next one's gonna be for the adductors, that's the inside of the leg.
So a lot of different ways that we can do this.
The way that I like to go is I like to just turn that roller here, come in a plank position, bring this foot up, and I'm just rolling from the inside, the top of the knee, all the way up through the groin area.
So we could go bent leg there or we could go straight leg there for a little bit deeper of a roll.
So after we're done with the foam rolling circuit, I like to get out a lacrosse ball.
You could use a golf ball, a baseball, anything hard.
And I'm just going to really dig into that heel.
So I'm going to apply some pressure in there.
I'm going to go from the heel all the way down through the ball of the foot.
And I'm going to really loosen up that fascia.
A lot of times our fascia of the feet take a lot of excess stress because we're on our feet all day, we're moving, we're cutting, we're jumping.
We got to really start to loosen that up.
Now after that, it's optional if you want to go up and work on the smaller muscles of the hip.
You can work on the smaller muscles of the shoulder up against a wall if you'd like to.
I just want to make sure that we get that foam roll circuit and we get that lacrosse ball on the feet.
Everything else is extra credit.
So the first thing we're gonna do for our dynamic warmup is stationary skips.
Now for all of these, you can take them on the move if you want.
For right now, I'm just gonna do them stationary just in case you don't have much room.
So we're just going up with the right, up with the left, just like we're running, and vice versa on that other side.
All right, I'm staying stiff with the feet, so I'm not letting my heel collapse.
I wanna stay on the ball of the foot.
And I'm just gonna go about 50% of my max speed.
I'm not going too fast yet.
We're going to go for 30 seconds on the skips.
For the seal jacks, it's basically like a jumping jack except I'm going to coordinate arms with the legs.
So I'm going to go over with the right and over with the right hand at the same time.
Back to neutral, over with the left, over with the left hand.
And then I'm just going to speed that up.
I'm going to get a good little rhythm going here.
maybe somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of your max speed, so we're not all out.
We're just getting that blood flowing.
We're going to go for 30 seconds.
For the over-under hamstring stretch, I'm just going to go over with the left leg.
I'm going to come down, touch the toe.
Now, if you can't touch the toe without rounding the back, then just go mid-shin or even to the knees, just as low as we can, but we don't want to go to the point where we have to round our back.
Okay, so I'm going to get down, touch my toes, back to neutral, and then I cross over the other way, and I'm going the other side.
All right, we're gonna go five over and back, so it's 10 total touches.
For the quad hamstring leans, I'm just gonna go into a quad stretch, so I'm gonna pull my right foot up.
I wanna make sure that my heel is touching my hip in that position, and I'm not out like this.
I'm keeping that knee in.
Now from there, I'm gonna keep the left knee straight, and I'm just gonna go into a lean as low as I can.
so i'm getting a really good stretch in the quad by going down and getting my knee back i'm getting it into the hip flexor a little bit more and i'm getting this hamstring a good stretch and i'm also working on my balance at the same time i'm going to go five leans and then i'm going to switch over five leans on the other side for the hip opener we're going to go push up position
I'm going to go left leg up outside this left hand.
Now from here, I'm just going to rotate up and hold.
One, two, three.
Now I'm going to go elbow down towards the floor.
We might not be able to touch the elbow to the ground.
That's okay.
Let's just get as low as we can there.
One, two, three.
three, and back up.
So three there, three there.
I'm gonna go five cycles and then I'm gonna switch to the other side, five and five, same thing.
For the adductor hip flexor combo, I'm going lateral with one skip.
So it's one skip lateral and I'm going down, I'm trying to touch this floor.
Keep this knee straight because I wanna get that stretch on the inside of the leg in this adductor.
I'm going back with the hip like I would in a normal squat.
and I'm getting nice and low, touch the floor, and I'm popping out to that other side.
All right, so let's just hold about one second at the bottom and pop out.
I need five of these down and back, so it's 10 total, and then I immediately go into a hip flexor.
Same thing with the skip, and now I land, I turn this foot forward, I pivot, I'm here, knee a couple inches off the floor, I'm gonna rotate, hold one, and then come back, and it's to the other side.
At the bottom of this stretch, I'm gonna get that really good stretch in the hip flexor, and I always need to turn towards the lead leg.
Don't make the mistake of going here.
You need to rotate towards that lead leg as far as we can, and I'm gonna feel it through that hip flexor, and then I pop out to the other side.
For the overhead deep squat progression, I'm going high with the hands, basic squat stance, so I'm a little wider than shoulder width.
I can point the toes out just a little bit, and then I'm just gonna go here,
it's going to be a hamstring stretch one two three keep the hands down and come into a deep squat try to stay back on your heels if you can one two three rock forward so i'm on my toes now drive the knees out with the elbows hold one
two, three, rock it back, heels back down to the ground, one, two, three, I need one hand up, two hand up, not out here, we need it back behind the head, and stand, alright, so that's one cycle, we're going to go for three of these, so it's one, two, three,
One, two, three, lean.
One, two, three, heels back down.
One, two, three, one up, two up, stand, all right?
If you cannot get down in that deep position, then let's just go as low as we can right here, and then on the lean, it's just gonna look like this, all right?
And then we're gonna come back, hopefully parallel to the floor, one up, two up, stand.
We just gotta get as low as we can, and every day try to progress so that we can get lower and lower, better range of motion.
So for the hip bridge, it's gonna be a very basic hip bridge.
Even if you're an advanced athlete, I want you to do this version.
So we're gonna get up nice and flat in a hip bridge.
I need to be flat through the hips.
I'm driving through my midfoot right now.
And now I'm just gonna squeeze my glutes together as hard as I possibly can.
So just holding in this position isn't that difficult.
But if I squeeze my glutes together as hard as I can so they're rock solid, I'm going to get a really good isometric contraction and I'm going to activate a lot of muscle fibers.
And we're just going to hold in this position for 25 seconds with a full squeeze and then relax.
This is all for hip activation, getting those glutes fired up.
It's the most powerful muscle in the body.
So we got to get them revved up for our session.
So for our 90-90 loaded mobility, I'm gonna go 90-90 shin box.
So I'm 90 degrees here, I'm 90 degrees here, and I'm 90 degrees here, all right?
I'm on my right glute, so that means I'm gonna go to my right side to start.
So I need my chest in line with this knee, so I'm not here, I'm squaring up chest to right knee, and then I'm just bringing chest down towards the knee.
Now, normally that would be a good static stretch.
I feel it in the glutes, the external rotators, all that good stuff.
But the brain wants load to make serious long-term changes.
So from here, instead of relying on my hands and just holding a static stretch, I'm going to contract that glue and contract the external rotators.
and push myself up and then slowly lower myself back down so i'm keeping the glute on tension i'm keeping that the hip structure on tension the entire time so the better we get at it with our palms down
the more we can start to get towards our fingertips and I'm barely pushing into the floor.
I'm really putting almost all of my weight on this leg and I'm just bouncing up and down in that position.
All right.
So you're going to feel a stretch.
in the outside of your hip, but you're also gonna feel like it's strengthening at the same time.
Your nervous system is gonna start trusting those positions.
That's a vulnerable position.
And so once the brain knows that it has some motor control and some strength in those weird angles, it's gonna start to trust it more and more.
Long term, that's pretty good for injury prevention.
Now how the reps work is by time.
So if it says 20 seconds, that would mean that I get to this bottom position and then the clock starts and I'm working for 20 seconds.
As that set goes on, I'm trying to go lighter and lighter with the hands so that I'm really loading the hip.
After our 20 seconds, we would switch over and hit it to the other side.
So for our around the world cross drives, what I'm going to do, if you can go barefoot, great.
If you can go socks off, even better.
If you're in a busy gym, just go socks on.
Or if you can't take your shoes off at all, that's fine.
Just do it in your shoes.
So I'm going to stand on one leg.
A lot of this is foot stability and ankle stability.
We're going to take that to the next level with this exercise.
So I'm on one leg.
I'm gonna go with the plate.
I want you to start with a 10 pound plate and then you can eventually get up to that 25 or maybe even the 35 but I haven't seen people go further than a 35 pound plate and do it with great form.
So I'm gonna hold the plate
right in front of my chest i'm going to be balanced here on my right leg if i'm balancing on my right leg i start to my right side okay that's very important now when that plate goes around my head i'm challenging that single leg stability because i now have a weight shift so i'm bringing it all the way around my head
bring it to here and then I'm bringing it outside my hip.
So outside this right hip and I go into a partial RDL and then I drive out of it diagonally and then I bring it right back down to my chest.
So notice what we have here, that cross rip that we work on a lot.
Remember if I have the basketball here and I'm getting that cross rip, it's the same thing.
We're challenging that stability.
So I'm here and then I drive out of it
bring it back, and then I'm right back in.
I'm always going to the same side.
So I'm going back, right side, around, right hip, drive diagonally left, back to chest, okay?
Once I finish the reps there, then I go to the other side.
And as you already know, now left foot means I start left around, I bring it to left hip, RDL, I drive diagonally to that right side, and I bring it back to my chest.
So for our slanted isometric holds, what I'm gonna do, I could go on a slant board or I could just use like a dumbbell or I could even just use a bumper plate.
But I like to put the bumper plate down to hold the dumbbell in place.
I would put the dumbbell there and then I can put my heel up on that dumbbell.
So the ball of my foot and toes is gonna be the only thing on the floor.
So now I get this angle where we're getting a lot of it to the quad.
the key here is we're going to do an isometric hold the goal is to improve the strength the stiffness of that patellar tendon now if you feel pain then you went a little too much all right so of course just start body weight in this position we want to get to a similar angle that we take off from
So somewhere between a 60 degree, 90 degree knee angle.
So I'm going to look at that angle from here and then I'm just going to come up and I'm going to lift this back leg.
Notice I'm not bringing the back foot up.
I'm going to leave this back foot back right here and I'm just going to hold for time.
Already I should start to feel a burn in the quads.
The whole goal is to get like an 8, a 9, or a 10 out of 10 burn in the quads with a 0 or up to a 1 out of 10 pain in the knee.
So we really shouldn't feel anything in the knee.
We should feel everything in the quad.
Of course, if that's easy, we're going to start to load up and hold dumbbells in the hands.
We get guys holding 50, 60, 70 pound dumbbells by the side.
So I'll hold 50s right now.
That's probably around the weight I would normally use.
And I'm just staying nice and stable in this position.
I do not want my knees to be shaking.
so it's going to really build some good isometric strength in the quads.
More importantly, it's going to build some health in that tendon, so it's going to get that tendon stronger, more stiff, so that it's really able to handle high forces, and it's not going to be constantly breaking down when we're out on the court beating it down over and over again, or in our plyometrics, which is also very demanding on the tendons.
Let's do it.
So for our Nordic hamstring curls, if you have a partner, this is the easiest way to go.
So your partner is going to sit behind you and hold down your ankles.
Now he's got to push pretty hard because your whole body weight is going to be coming down.
So if he's light, then you're going to lift him up.
So he's got to put a little bit of force in there.
Now I like to use a foam roller.
So you put the front of your ankle on a foam roller, and then you kind of dig your toes into the ground.
And it's just a little bit more comfortable on the ankles.
Now, I know a lot of you guys don't have a partner.
So this is how we would do it without a partner.
I would set up a barbell and make sure it's nice and heavy.
Make sure you got weights on both sides.
If you have a rack, then put it on the inside of the rack and then you put a weighted plate on the other side so that the barbell is not going to roll.
If you don't have a rack, we would use the barbell and then we would put a weight behind it and we would put another 45 pound plate in front of it.
So it's still kind of trapped in there and it's not going to roll back and forth.
This is optional, but I like to use this because it's a little bit softer.
So I just use a pad there.
And then you always need a pad
for your knees all right so this is your setup now from here a lot of people go tall and they come down i if you're super advanced that's fine i would rather see a little bit of hip flexion so we're initially in just a little bit of hip flexion and then from there we're going down i want you to go basically as slow as you can or four seconds all the way down this is a lowering exercise once i get to the bottom i'm going to push back up and i'm coming all the way back up pretty fast you don't have to go slow on the way up
so initial hip flexion from there I'm not bending the hips more I stay in this initial hip flexion and I slowly lower lower lower lower push off and come back up if you can get a light push off that's great a lot of you guys to start
you're going to have to really push off hard to get back up.
Otherwise, you're going to get stuck halfway up.
So if you get extremely good at this, we can eventually either go a very light tap or there are some people who have such good strength to body weight ratios, they can just put their hands behind their back and do the whole thing.
Now, you might cramp up on this exercise if you're not used to this intense of a hamstring contraction.
It's a very hard hamstring contraction.
So if you cramp, then stretch it out.
Try to get back into it, but this might be a little bit too advanced and your hamstrings aren't quite used to it yet.
So just try to make it easier or come up with an alternative if you continue to cramp.
Now the other mistake that people make is they point the toes and they go from there.
A lot of times your calf will start to cramp when you're in that position.
So I like to go toes kind of straight down into the ground.
So I'm digging into the ground and then I get a lot less in the calf and I really just feel it straight through the hamstrings, through the glutes, and then you should feel a little bit through the low back as well.
So for my rapid calf raise, I could use a bumper plate or I could use a stair, step, anything that's nice and stable.
Now you're going to want to hold on to something for this exercise, even if your balance is good.
So I'm going to hold on to a power rack, hold on to whatever you want that keeps you nice and balanced.
About half of my foot is going on the step, so I just want the ball of my foot on there, my heel is hanging off.
Now, it's a normal calf raise, except we're going for max elasticity, so I want you to bounce with it, and we're still getting a full range of motion, so it's nice and rapid.
So explode up to the toe, and then drop down, get your heel down as low as you can, and pop back up.
Alright, so it's nice and fast.
and you shouldn't feel like it's a long, slow contraction like you normally would do.
Now this is a higher rep exercise.
If you do start to get extremely fatigued, you can always pull yourself up with the arms a little bit and kind of give yourself a little bit of assistance with your upper body because I don't want you to get so tired
that you start to slow down.
I want you to stay nice and rapid and bouncy because if you lose that speed and you lose that bouncy and that springiness, then we're getting away from the Achilles and we're getting more on to strictly using that calf muscle contraction.
We want the perfect combination of both on this exercise.
Let's do it.
For our 7-11 breathing, what we're going to do is just lay down on our back.
Make sure that you're in a relaxed place.
I know you're probably in a gym, so it might be a little bit loud.
If you have headphones, throw on some headphones, throw on some slow music, maybe some yoga or meditation type music.
And all I'm going to do is just lay down and I'm going to breathe in through my nose for seven seconds.
And I'm also going to breathe out through my nose for 11 seconds.
So I'm not going to open my mouth for this whole drill.
So it's in through the nose, and I want to make sure that my stomach is rising.
Your chest will naturally rise a little bit, but most of you, when you think of deep breathing, what happens is your belly stays still.
and your chest puffs up and your shoulders elevate.
That means we are not actually getting all of that air, all of that oxygen down to the deepest part of the lungs.
So I want you to think about letting the belly rise as you take that breath in, okay?
So we're here, in deep through the nose, let the stomach rise.
Seven seconds, once you finish that seven seconds, it's out through the nose.
and that stomach will fall, okay?
Initially, this is very uncomfortable for guys.
I've had NBA players that absolutely hated this until they were in their third or fourth session and they started to get used to it because you do have to learn how to pace your breath.
If you just breathe in as hard as you can and breathe out as hard as you can, you're not gonna be able to go for seven in and 11 out.
You gotta learn to go very slow and pace that breath, okay?
this is doing a lot of stuff I mean for one we're helping you expand the lungs we're teaching you how to to breathe yourself into a more calmer state but from a recovery standpoint this could possibly be the best thing that you could do after a workout better than foam rolling better than static stretching because after a workout we're in that sympathetic state that's that fight that's that workout that's that game mode okay I got to get you to the parasympathetic state that's relax recover all recovery
happens in the parasympathetic state.
Okay, so if I'm still hyped up after the workout, I'm killing my recovery.
So as soon as we're done with the workout, we wanna do these breathing exercises to get us into that parasympathetic state and then I can really start to aid my recovery and I'm back better than ever tomorrow, ready to train again.
So the first one for our static stretch is just going to be a basic quad stretch.
So I'm just going to go heel to hip and I'm just going to get up nice and tall.
I'm going to raise my opposite hand and I'm just going to hold for 15 seconds and then I'm going to switch over to the other side.
If you need to hold on to something for balance, that's okay.
We're not going to get the same arm raise, but you can hold on and just make sure that we're nice and tall and that heel is touching the hip the whole time.
For the elevated hamstring stretch, I'm just gonna use a bench, a box, a chair.
I'm just gonna get my heel on there.
That toe is pointed up towards the ceiling.
And then I'm just gonna hinge from the hips.
So I don't wanna lean forward and round my back.
I'm just gonna lean forward.
from the hips keeping my back nice and straight if you want to reach down and touch your ankle or touch your toe you can but don't reach down and start to bend over from the back so i like to just keep my hands here to make sure that i'm not rounding the upper back and i'm just going to hold 15 seconds and then i'm going to switch over to the other side
15 seconds on the other side as well.
We should feel this stretch all in the hamstrings.
So that is the back of the thigh.
We'll feel it a little bit down into the calves, but we should feel it mostly hamstrings.
For our adductor stretch, I'm just gonna go one leg out.
I need to lock out this knee so I'm nice and straight.
I'm gonna sit back onto my heel.
So now look at this back foot.
I'm not curling the toe under.
I'm putting it down like this so the top of my foot is flat to the floor.
and I'm gonna sit my hips back to that heel.
Now from there, I can already feel a little bit of a stretch in the adductor.
Now if you don't really try to square your chest towards the floor, now from there, if you don't feel a big stretch already, we're gonna come down to the elbows and we're just gonna hang out in this position for 15 seconds.
Alright, so I should feel that stretch all through the adductors.
That's the inside of the leg.
After 15 seconds, I'm gonna switch over to that other side.
Same thing.
For my glute stretch, I'm gonna pull this knee back.
Now make sure that this other leg stays down on the floor.
So I need my right knee and my right heel down through the ground.
I'm not gonna lift off and I'm just gonna lay my head back and just pull this knee as far towards the chest as I can.
Now a lot of you, as you pull, the tendency is to rise here because we're tight in the hip flexors.
If that's the case, try to have somebody hold that leg down or strap it down with a band
or just realize that you don't have that range of motion yet and you can only pull to right here.
But this is a glute stretch for this left leg, but at the same time, for a lot of you, this will be a hip flexor stretch on that right side.
So I'm just gonna pull back, hold for 15 seconds.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side, trying to get full range of motion with that other leg.
So for our hip flexor stretch, make sure that we have something soft.
I don't want you guys putting your knee on a hardwood.
Make sure you have a pad or a soft floor to do this stretch on.
So I'm just going to go on one knee.
This knee is going to go 90 degrees.
So I'm 90 there.
My ankle is directly underneath that knee.
Now from here, I just got to get up nice and tall.
Some of you are already going to feel a stretch in the hip flexor because we're extra tight.
Now from there, I'm just going to lean forward
So I should have this knee back behind the hip.
And now from there, I'm just raising straight up and I'm going to hold.
All right.
So I feel a big stretch from here all the way down through the bottom of that hip flexor.
After 15 seconds, I'm going to switch over to that other side and do the same thing.
For my calf stretch, I'm basically going to do what they would call a downward dog in yoga.
So I'm here, I'm going to push back like this.
I'm going to straighten out my arms and now I'm just going to cross over.
So I'm going to put my left foot over that right foot and I'm going to try to get that right heel down towards the floor or as close as I can.
So I do have a straight knee, so we're stretching out what's called the gastrocnemius, that's the outside calf muscle.
So I shouldn't feel the stretch as much down in the ankle and the Achilles as we would on some of our hip mobility drills.
We should feel it on the outside of that calf muscle.
A lot of us aren't going to be able to get our heel all the way to the floor, that's okay.
Just work on getting it down as low as we can.
After 15 seconds, I'm switching over to that other side.
So quick minimum dose advice for day three and day six.
This is our core day.
We're going to get a little bit of mobility, but not too much.
As you can see, already extremely efficient.
If you want to add core exercises from previous phases, go ahead.
I've just made this one very, very short, straight to the point, since our other days are pretty tough.
I don't want you to kill yourself and drain your nervous system by doing way too much core work.
Cable dead bug, got to do it.
If you got to do that with a band, that's fine.
Elastic leg kick, do this even if you are flexible.
Hollow press, very important.
Kneeling hip series, this one is going to be challenging from a hip mobility standpoint, but also from a hip stability standpoint.
Definitely don't skip that.
Lateral step core stiffness, very important.
If you feel like you need a warmup for that, go through an additional lower body warmup.
Some people have creaky knees and they can't quite get into this intense little partial lunge.
So if you feel like you need to warm up for that, go ahead and do an extra dynamic warmup.
And then at the end of that, add whatever core you want.
And of course, if you want to add a third core day, that's completely fine.
Let's do it.
So for our cable dead bug, I'm using a bench and a cable machine right now.
You don't need the bench.
You could go on the floor with the cable machine or if you don't have the cable machine or it's inconvenient in your gym, set up with a power rack or anything that you could hook a band around and you're just going to go on the floor and hold that band right here just so that you have to fire up your core, fire up your lats and stay nice and stable through that torso throughout this exercise.
What I'm going to do is reach back and grab the rope.
Notice I have it at a cable setting to where I can hold straight out.
If that's too low, then that line of pull is going to be really awkward.
So I'm holding right here.
I got to engage my lats and engage my core.
And then I'm going up with the feet.
My back is nice and flat so I don't have an exaggerated curve.
nice and flat and then I'm just going alternating all the way out back up and the other side all the way out back up all right you got to squeeze that core and keep that good neutral spine all the way through this exercise now you're not necessarily going to feel a burn of like a crunch or a sit-up but you should feel a little bit of a burn in the core more importantly this type of core strength and stability actually translates to the core
For the elastic leg kicks, I want you to think about a normal, kind of like a Frankenstein kick, except we're gonna make it a little bit more rapid and a little bit more elastic.
So I'm just gonna stay on the balls of the feet and I'm just gonna kick up my leg as high as I can, keeping that knee straight, and I'm just gonna switch every time so it ends up being a little bit of a skip and then a straight leg kick.
Okay.
Now I'm popping off the balls of the feet.
I do not want your heels to touch the floor.
And the reason why we're doing this, you're not going to get a huge burn.
This isn't a huge workout.
We're trying to get some elasticity back in the post chain, some elasticity in the hamstrings.
So a lot of people sit there and stretch or even do a normal dynamic warm-up for elasticity.
The thing is, for a muscle to actually increase elasticity, it has to be under one second.
So if I'm going slow with that kick or if I'm holding
a stretch it might increase what we call plasticity how flexible we get but not elasticity and elasticity is what actually translates to sprinting and jumping so everything has to be under one second and that's why we're going rapid with those kicks i want you to think about getting that leg up as quick as you can as high as you can
So for our hollow press, this is a core exercise.
It looks like I'm working my chest.
I'm not actually working my chest.
You will get a little pump in your pecs and your triceps and your shoulders.
Most importantly, this is for the core.
So whatever you would normally dumbbell bench press, we're going to go about half of that.
So if normally you would for 10, you rep out like 60s, I want you to go a 30 pound dumbbell.
All right.
position here and then I'm just leaning back.
I'm bringing my feet off the ground about six inches and now I'm bringing my shoulder off the ground about six inches.
So my lower back is flat to the ground and my butt is on the ground.
Nothing else is touching.
A lot of people make the mistake of going up here.
I need you laid down flat and then just come up a little bit.
From here, I'm going to touch my elbow to the floor.
And then I'm just going to press, lock out at the top.
All right.
So I'm challenging that anti-rotation and I'm challenging those front abs by holding in this position.
All right.
Keep it nice and slow.
Don't let yourself fly into rotation with that dumbbell.
So this is an exercise where we can load up as heavy as possible, but I do want you to start light and gradually increase as we go.
For most of us, like I said, you're gonna be about 50% of what you would normally hit a dumbbell bench press with.
Okay, so for my kneeling hip series, we're gonna use a band.
I like to hook two bands together so that I actually have a little more room.
Make sure whatever you're hooking the band to is nice and stable like a towel rack or a heavy couch or something that's not gonna be pulled along with the band.
Of course, the thicker we go with that band, the more difficult this is gonna be, okay?
And the further out we go, the more difficult it's gonna be.
So I would start with just light tension until you get used to this drill.
I use a pad so there's light on the knees.
I'm going to curl the toes and I'm going to sit my hips back.
First of all, right there, I'm getting some decent toe range motion, which is really important for us.
Now from here, I'm just going to explode forward.
So I'm going to come to full hip extension.
I'm going to squeeze my glutes for two seconds as hard as I can at the top.
Now from here, I'm going to bring this right foot out around and get that foot down.
So I'm going to try not to lean the shoulders.
Try to stay level, stable with the shoulders and with the hips.
And I'm bringing it around.
Get that foot flat.
And then from here, I'm driving out and I'm going to squeeze the right foot down.
Drive out.
Get this leg parallel to the floor and squeeze this right glute.
Hold for two.
And we're right back down.
So it's here.
Extend.
Squeeze.
One, two.
Right foot up.
Drive out.
Squeeze.
One, two.
And then we're right back down.
This is challenging our hip stability in so many different ways.
We're activating our glutes with that explosive extension.
We're getting some toe range of motion.
We're getting some lateral hip stability, those little tiny hip stabilizer muscles when we're on that half kneel and we're bringing that leg up.
So there's so many different aspects of hip stability going on here.
This drill is great.
for building a good solid base so we can add more explosiveness to it later on and then of course you're going to do the desired reps with the right foot going forward and then we're going to do the desired reps then with the left foot going forward so we always balance out each side
So for my lateral step core stiffness, what I'm gonna do is use a cable machine.
I'm gonna get that cable set at around hip height.
Now if you don't have a cable machine, you could just do these with a band, get it around something stable, around hip height.
Either one will work, but I like to use a cable machine because we can load up a little heavier.
So of course, as always, we start very light.
Once we feel comfortable, we gradually go up.
I like to go around 80, 90, up to 100 pounds.
So I'm going to go feet pretty close together.
So I'm maybe hip width, shoulder width apart here.
Already I should feel like it's really pulling me in.
Now I'm just going to take a little step with this left foot.
and as soon as that foot hits, I'm landing with that 90 degree knee angle and then I'm keeping my core stiff and I'm pushing out of it.
So many of you, what you're gonna do is you're gonna step and then you're gonna have this torso collapse.
You got to keep in mind a lot of the battle on lateral movements, right, if I'm changing direction, is that core stiffness.
So if I get here and I go to change directions and I deform from the core, we lose milliseconds on that change of direction.
So what I want you to focus on is keeping that stiff core.
As soon as that foot hits, I do not collapse at all and I can just push right back out.
Alright, so it's feet together, it's here, short ground contact time, and just push up out of it.
Alright, it's gotta be fast, it's gotta be rapid.
We are gonna feel a burn in the leg, but we should also feel it in the core, especially in that outside oblique.
